Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TQE.2020.DOI
Hybrid classical–quantum
branch–and–bound algorithm for solving
integer linear problems
CLAUDIO SANAVIO1,2,3, EDOARDO TIGNONE4, AND ELISA ERCOLESSI2,3
1Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Center for Life Nano-Neuroscience at la Sapienza, Viale Regina Elena 291, 00161 Roma, Italy
2Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia dell’Università di Bologna, I-40127 Bologna, Italy
3INFN, Sezione di Bologna, I-40127 Bologna, Italy
4Leithà S.r.l. | Unipol Group, Bologna, Italy
Corresponding author: Claudio Sanavio (email: claudio.sanavio@iit.it).
This research is funded by the International Foundation Big Data and Artificial Intelligence for Human Development (IFAB) through the
project “Quantum Computing for Applications”. E. E. is partially supported by INFN through the project “QUANTUM”. C. S. and E. E.
acknowledge financial support from the National Centre for HPC, Big Data and Quantum Computing (Spoke 10, CN00000013).
ABSTRACT Quantum annealers are suited to solve several logistic optimization problems expressed in the
QUBO formulation. However, the solutions proposed by the quantum annealers are generally not optimal,
as thermal noise and other disturbing effects arise when the number of qubits involved in the calculation is
too large. In order to deal with this issue, we propose the use of the classical branch–and–bound algorithm,
that divides the problem into sub-problems which are described by a lower number of qubits. We analyze the
performance of this method on two problems, the knapsack problem and the traveling salesman problem.
Our results show the advantages of this method, that balances the number of steps that the algorithm has to
make with the amount of error in the solution found by the quantum hardware that the user is willing to risk.
All the results are actual runs on the quantum annealer D-Wave Advantage.
INDEX TERMS Quantum annealing, binary linear problem, knapsack problem, traveling salesman
problem, branch and bound
I. INTRODUCTION
Logistic optimization problems, whose goal is to find the
solution which minimizes a suitable cost function given a
set of constraints, can often be expressed in terms of binary
combinatorial problems. One way to tackle this kind of
problems consists of exploring all possible solutions, thus
pursuing a brute-force strategy. A better strategy is found
in the so called branch–and–bound (BB) algorithm [1], that
explores sub-combinations of the problem and excludes those
that either do not satisfy the constraints or those whose value
of the cost function is higher than the solutions previously
investigated. Paradigmatic examples, that can be both solved
with the BB algorithm [2]–[5], are given by:
i) the Knapsack Problem (KP) [2], in which one searches
for the selection of objects (from a predefined set) that
maximizes the load’s value while adhering to the capacity
constraint of the carrier;
ii) the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) [3], [6], which
aims at finding the minimal route that passes through differ-ent cities, with the constraint that the path crosses all of the
cities exactly once.
In recent times, with physical platforms that have been
made available to researchers, attention has been driven by
the possibility that quantum computers can speed-up the
resolution of several NP-hard problems [7]. In this work we
analyze a particular quantum computer, the quantum annealer
of D-Wave, which is expected to be particularly suitable
for solving binary optimization problems. The two problems
mentioned above are perfect examples of combinatorial prob-
lems that may benefit from the use of a quantum computer.
However, few works have been done on the actual resolution
on the D-wave machine. In Ref. [8] the authors tried to solve
small KP using the D-wave quantum annealer, finding results
far from the global optimum. In Ref. [9] the authors have
analyzed the shortest path problem, a slight variant of the
TSP. They successfully determined the optimal solution for
graphs composed of up to six nodes, a limitation that may
not align with current practical requirements. In fact, the
VOLUME 4, 2016 1arXiv:2311.09700v1  [quant-ph]  16 Nov 2023
Claudio Sanavio et al. : Hybrid classical–quantum branch–and–bound algorithm ...
quantum annealer is still a developing technology, currently
affected by noise that makes it unable to find the global
solution even to simple problems.
In order to overcome the apparent failure of the fruitful
use of this device in the near period, we propose to use a
classical-hybrid protocol, in which the quantum hardware
is used as a subroutine for a variant of the classical BB
algorithm. In particular, we show that thanks to the BB
algorithm we can reduce the size of the problem down to
a number of instances that are feasible for the quantum
computer. With this strategy, the quantum computer can fully
show its potential and find an optimal solution to the problem.
Our findings show that we can exploit near-term quantum
computers to speed up the solution of a problem reducing
the number of queries to both the quantum and the classical
computer. However, there is a trade off between the quality
of the found solution, measured in terms of its proximity
to the global optimal solution, and the achievable speed-
up. A similar idea has been proposed in Ref. [10], the BB
algorithm was applied to a large number of QUBO problems,
by simulating the quantum annealer on a classical computer.
In the paper, we apply a hybrid algorithm to study both the
KP and the TSP making use of the real D-Wave machine Ad-
vantage [11]–[13]. The content is as follows. In Section II we
review the definition of the TSP and the KP and we explain
how they can be solved using the BB algorithm. In Section III
we show how we can encode the optimal solution of the TSP
and the KP as the ground state of a suitable Hamiltonian
for the quantum annealer. In Section IV we first discuss the
issues related to directly solve the integer linear problems via
unrestricted algorithm on the quantum hardware. Next, we
define our hybrid classical-quantum algorithm and study its
performance on examples of the KP and TSP problems. In
Section V we draw our conclusions and present outlooks.
II. THE BINARY LINEAR PROBLEM
The binary linear optimization problem (BLOP) aims to
find the minimum of the cost function z(x)over the set of
possible solutions Ω, namely
minx∈Ω(x) =cTx (1a)
s.t. Ax≤b (1b)
x∈ {0,1}N, (1c)
withcbeing an N-dimensional vector, Abeing an N×m
matrix and bbeing an mdimensional vector. xis an N
dimensional vector whose components take value 0or1.
Although the simple form of Eqs. (1), the BLOP is generally
NP-hard [14].
In this section we explore one algorithm that is used to
solve BLOPs, the BB algorithm. The core procedure of the
BB algorithm for finding the solution of the problem PΩon
the set Ωconsists into analyzing the restrictions R¯Ωof the
original set ¯Ω⊂Ω.
The lowest value of the cost function of the original problem
minx∈Ωz(x)is a lower bound of the minimum of the costfunction of the restricted problem minx∈¯Ωz(x). As we are
dealing with a linear problem, the minimum and the maxi-
mum of the cost function is to be found at the borders of the
setΩ. However the optimal solution could have non-binary
values.
Dividing the original problem into sub-problems allows us
to consider the restricted problems separately and choose the
one with minimum cost. Fig. 1a shows the procedure of the
BB algorithm when applied to a 3-dimensional system. In
Fig. 1b the procedure is represented as a tree, where each
branch represents a restriction of the problem into a selected
subset.
We define zPas the current upper bound of the cost
function. We initialize it to the upper bound of the cost
function over the set Ω. This is done at the root of the tree and
is equivalent to initialize zPto the value ∞. In the example
shown in Fig. 1, we analyze the restricted problem R0, where
¯Ωis a lower dimensional set that has the value of the first
variable fixed to zero, i.e. x1= 0. The lower bound of the
cost function in the restricted region is zR0< zP, because of
the original large value of zP. We then proceed by restricting
the second variable x2= 0so defining the problem R00, and
finally the third one x3= 0 in order to specify the problem
R000, and find the value of the cost function z(0,0,0)for
this restriction. This procedure is called branching and stands
for the subsequent restriction of the problem into different
sub-problems. Once the value of the cost function for a
certain branch has been found, we proceed with the bounding
procedure. The current upper bound zPis updated to zR000.
From now on, we consider only subsets where the optimal
cost function is less than the updated zP. We now relax the
problem, going back to R00, and set x3= 1. IfzR001< zP,
the latter is updated to this value.
We analyze other values of the variables relaxing the
problem and applying different restrictions, as long as we
explore all the solutions. If the lower bound of the cost
function zRiin the follow-up restriction Riis greater than
the current upper bound zP, we do not need to investigate
that restricted region, and we can skip to another branch. If
a node in the tree (a restricted subset) does not satisfy the
constraints, the node is not considered valid and the bounding
process does not take place.
In the tree of Fig. 1a each branch develops on the assumption
that the value of a variable is fixed to either 0or1, but the
same method can be applied to integer values of the variables.
Finally, the optimal solution will minimize the cost function
while satisfying the constraints.
A. THE KNAPSACK PROBLEM
In the KP, we have Nobjects, each with a value viand
a weight wi, for i= 1, . . . , N . The problem consists of
choosing the items to put in the knapsack so that their
total value is maximum while not exceeding the knapsack
capacity. This problem can be formulated by using Nbinary
variables xi= 1(i= 1,···, N), with xi= 1if the object i
enters in the knapsack, and xi= 0 if it does not. The values
2 VOLUME 4, 2016
Claudio Sanavio et al. : Hybrid classical–quantum branch–and–bound algorithm ...
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 1: (a) Visualization of the BB algorithm in the 3
dimensional space [0,1]3with constraint Ax≤b. Each
restriction Rrepresents a subset of [0,1]3where one or
more variables have been constrained to a binary value. (b)
Schematic representation of the BB algorithm as a tree. At
each step BB checks if the constraints are satisfied and if
the cost function of the node is lower than the current upper
bound. When the branching has terminated, the bounding
process takes place and the value of the upper bound zP
is updated (green node). If the next branch finds a value of
z > z P(yellow nodes) the branch is not explored further.
The same happens if the constraints are violated (red node).and the weights can be collected in two vectors vandw
respectively. The BLOP (1) is written as
minxz(x) =−vTx (2a)
s.t. w(x) =wTx≤W, (2b)
x∈ {0,1}N. (2c)
The KP can be solved using the BB algorithm. As we
assume that all the weights wiand the values viare positive
numbers for all i= 1, . . . , N , we can slightly modify the
BB algorithm in order to make it more efficient. We call this
version KP-BB. We start from the string x0= (0, . . . , 0),
which describes the empty knapsack. The value function z
and the weight function ware both zero. The first branch
has the value of the first variable set, x1= 1. The value
function zis updated to −v1and the weight function takes
value w1. The k-th branch sets the k-th variable xk= 1
and sets the previous (k−1)variables to zero. At each k-th
branch, the value function is −vkand the weight function is
wk. With this ordering, each of the kbranches defines a new
knapsack problem, where the k-th object has been chosen
and the problem is to choose among the remaining N−k
objects. The loading capacity of the new problem is W−wk
and the value of the empty knapsack is initialized to −vk.
The KP-BB algorithm recursively applies this restriction of
the problem to each branch, following a so-called depth-
first search, where the search scouts a tree till it ends, then
traces back its steps. At this point, the algorithm passes to
another branch. In Fig. 2 we show the tree representation of
the KP-BB algorithm for a problem with three objects. In the
node’s box the value of the upper bound of the cost function
is shown. When a new solution is explored, the algorithm
identifies it as optimal (green), valid but not optimal (yellow)
or not valid (red). It stops either when all the variables have
been considered, or when the total weight of the knapsack
has exceeded its limit.
B. THE TRAVELING SALESMAN PROBLEM
The traveling salesman problem describes an agent that has
to visit different cities starting from the depot and returning
to it at the end of the journey. The problem consists of finding
the route with the lowest cost that visits all the nodes exactly
once, where the cost can describe time, distance or money
used in the travel. TSP can be modeled by a weighted graph,
where the nodes are the cities and the weights of the edges
represent the transportation cost from one node to another
one. One can always assume the graph to be fully connected,
by putting the corresponding cost to be very high (possibly
infinity) if two cities are not actually connected by a direct
path.
The graph is represented by the pair G= (V, C)with
V={d,1,2, . . . , N −1}being the set of Nvertices and
Cbeing the weighted adjacency N×Nmatrix of the graph.
The component Cijrepresents the cost of traveling from node
ito node jand it is not necessarily symmetric. A solution
VOLUME 4, 2016 3
Claudio Sanavio et al. : Hybrid classical–quantum branch–and–bound algorithm ...
FIGURE 2: Schematic representation of the KP-BB algo-
rithm as a tree, when applied to a knapsack problem with
three objects. The nodes represent a solution as written
above them. In the boxes we write the value of the cost
function for that solution. The knapsack is initially empty
x= (0 ,0,0), z= 0 and it is filled with the first object,
described by the solution vector (1,0,0). The value function
is updated to −v1and the weight to w1. Hence, a new KP
problem is defined as described in the text. A green node
represents a valid solution that is currently optimal. A yellow
node represents a solution that is valid, but not optimal. A red
node represents a non-valid solution, where the constraints
are not satisfied.
for the TSP is the cycle path along the edges of the graph
that starts from the depot node, named d, passes through
all the other N−1nodes exactly once and ends in the
initial node d. One mathematical description of TSP is given
by the Dantzig–Fulkerson–Johnson formulation [15], which
considers N2binary variables xij, each representing the edge
that connects the node iwith the node j. The corresponding
linear problem is obtained in the form of Eq. (1) collecting
the binary variables xijinto a N×Nmatrix x.
minxz(x) =Tr[Cx] =P
i̸=jCijxij, (3a)
s.t.Pn
j=1xij= 1,∀i (3b)Pn
i=1xij= 1,∀j (3c)P
i,j∈Sxij≤ |S|, (3d)
∀S⊂V,2≤ |S| ≤N−2,
xij∈ {0,1}. (3e)
The first line, Eq. (3a) is the objective function that we
want to minimize. The other equations are the constraints
given by the TSP. In particular, Eqs. (3b),(3c) state that
each vertex must have one inward and one outward edge
respectively. Eq. (3d) avoids the presence of sub-paths that
do not cover the whole set of vertices. Here Sis a subset of
V, and|S|is the number of elements in S. Eq.(3e) states that
thexijare binary variables.
The TSP can be solved with the BB algorithm [3], [4].
Similar to the knapsack problem, the BB algorithm offers
a strategy to systematically explore all solutions, which can
be tailored for the specific problem at hand. We refer to thiscustomized version of the branch–and–bound algorithm as
TSP-BB.
We start from the depot with initial cost function z= 0, and
we choose the path to one of the N−1cities, that we denote
with k. Then, the TSP-BB algorithm defines a new TSP
made of N−2cities, where the cost matrix is modified to
include the previous choice. The new TSP has N−1vertices
and new adjacency matrix C′with adjacency components
C′
ik=Cid. Thus the initial cost of the new TSP has the
updated value z→z+Cdk. Different from the KP-BB
defined before, the TSP-BB has a best-first search approach,
where the next node analyzed by the algorithm is the one
with current best zvalue. When all the variables have been
explored in one branch, we define the upper bound of the
travel cost z. Any time the initial travel cost of a branch ex-
ceeds z, we neglect that branch. On the contrary, we explore
the branches with travel cost lower than z, until we find the
optimal solution. Fig. 3 shows a schematic representation of
the TSP-BB algorithm as a tree, when applied to a graph with
5cities.
FIGURE 3: Schematic representation of the TSP-BB algo-
rithm applied to a traveling salesman problem with 5nodes.
Once an edge is chosen, the problem reduces to another
TSP with one node less. The initial travel cost is obtained
summing up the partial travel costs written on the branches.
The travel cost of the colored path is z=cd2+c24+c43+
c31+c1d. Then, this value is compared to the travel cost of
the unexplored branches. If a branch has an initial travel cost
lower than the current optimal value, the branch is explored
next by the algorithm.
III. THE QUBO AND ISING FORMULATION
In this work we analyze the use of the D-wave Advan-
tage quantum computer to solve the combinatorial problems
introduced in the previous sections. The D-wave machine
belongs to the class of quantum annealers, that work through
the application of a global time-dependent Hamiltonian. An
introduction to quantum annealers is presented in Appendix
A.
The D-Wave machine evolves with an Ising-like Hamilto-
nian,
4 VOLUME 4, 2016
Claudio Sanavio et al. : Hybrid classical–quantum branch–and–bound algorithm ...
H(s) = −A(s)X
iˆσi
x (4)
+B(s)X
ihiˆσi
z+X
i>jJijˆσi
zˆσj
z
.
The coefficient A(s), B(s)have the role of the schedule func-
tionfin Eq. (18), and sis the adimensional time s=t/ta,
normalized with respect to the annealing time .
We can write any binary linear problem with constraints
as an Ising problem. In fact, any BLOP can be written
as a quadratic unconstrained binary optimization (QUBO)
problem. This defines a new cost function
Q=−N+n′X
i=1cixi+mX
j=1λj(bj−N+n′X
i=1Aijxi)2,(5)
where we have introduced new n′= log2(max( bj) + 1)
binary slack variables, that make the problem unconstrained.
Each additional i-th slack variable, with i=N+1, . . . , N +
n′has cost coefficient ci= 0 and constraint matrix compo-
nents Aij= 2i−1/2N, with j= 1, . . . , m . The mparameters
λjare called Lagrange multipliers. Generally speaking, if λj
are too small, the minimization of the first term is favored,
which corresponds to the minimization of the cost function,
without any constraints. On the other hand, if λjis too large,
the second term acquires more importance and the optimal
solution tends to satisfy the j-th constraint, ignoring the other
terms. There is a range of values for each λjs.t. the optimal
solution of Qis the optimal solution of Eq.(1). However, this
range of values is both problem and size dependent.
In order to pass from binary variables into spin variables
we define M=N+n′new variables
si=2xi−1
2, s i∈ {−1
2,1
2}, (6)
and set
hi=ci
2+mX
j=1λjbjAij−mX
j=1λj
2AijMX
k=iAkj
Jij=mX
k=1λk
2AikAjk, (7)
that transform the QUBO function Qof Eq.(5) into
HQ=X
ihisi+X
i>jJijsisj, (8)
whose minimal energy solution corresponds to the ground
state of the quantum Hamiltonian (4) at t=ta.
Although we have a variety of results that show the power
of quantun annealers, other results show that when the num-
ber of qubits is large the D-Wave machine has difficulty into
finding the global solution [8]. In the next section we are
going to propose a way to circumvent this problem.IV. EFFICIENT USE OF QUANTUM ANNEALERS IN
HYBRID CLASSICAL-QUANTUM ALGORITHM
In this section we propose an hybrid way to use the currently
available quantum annealers to produce reliable solution to
some NP-hard problems. In Section II we explained how the
BB algorithm can be used to treat either the KP and the TSP.
Here, we apply this algorithm to both the problems, stopping
when the restricted sub-problems have a size that is small
enough that the optimal solution can be obtained by the D-
Wave machine.
A. THE KNAPSACK PROBLEM
Suppose we want to solve a KP with Nobjects and capacity
W. In order to be able to tract the optimal solution of prob-
lem (2), we choose Nobjects with increasing value vi=i,
and with same weight wi= 1, fori= 1, . . . , N . Thus, the
optimal solution is the knapsack filled with just the last W
objects with highest value, xopt= (0, . . . , 0,eW), with eW
being the W-dimensional vector of ones, eW= (1, . . . , 1),
and with the total value zopt=W[N+1
2(1−W)]. After
including the slack variables, the vector xopthasM=
N+⌈log2(W+ 1)⌉components.
The QUBO function (5) is
Q=−MX
i=1vixi+λ(W−MX
i=1wixi)2. (9)
Using Eqs. (2) and (6) we can write the Ising Hamiltonian
of the problem. Because Eq. (2) has only one constraint, we
just need to adjust the one parameter λ. In order to find the
optimal value of λwe proceed as follows.
We suppose yis a solution that satisfies the constraint. If
we add a single object, say xlthat overloads the knapsack,
the QUBO function should be s.t.
Q(y+xl)> Q(y). (10)
As it has to be valid for any possible solution, we need to
take the maximum of the right side of Eq. (10). Thus, we set
λ= max ivi+ 1. This choice ensures that the Hamiltonian
ground state is also the optimal solution of the KP.
We have performed an analysis of the bandgap for this
particular configuration and we have seen that it scales poly-
nomially with the size of the problem as M−αfor some
exponent α, see Appendix B. This is a promising feature,
that means the total annealing time scales as ta∼Mαand
therefore makes the problem solvable in polynomial time.
We have to stress the fact that the polynomial scaling refers
to this particular configuration of the problem, and it is not
applicable to all the possible KPs.
Let us first examine what happens when we solve the unre-
stricted BLOP on the D-Wave machine. In this case, we find
that not only the solution is not the optimal one but also the
constraint is not satisfied. Indeed, when the number of qubits
is too large, the system is not able to act as an ideal quantum
annealer [8], as the results are affected by thermal noise [16].
One may think of increasing the value of the parameter λ
VOLUME 4, 2016 5
Claudio Sanavio et al. : Hybrid classical–quantum branch–and–bound algorithm ...
FIGURE 4: Measured probability p0as a function of the
annealing time for different N-objects knapsack problems
withW=N. The value is an average over 20 runs, with
1000 measurements per run.
FIGURE 5: Mean value of the minimal energy found for the
N-objects knapsack problems with W=Nfor different
annealing times. The value is an average over 20 runs, with
1000 measurements per run.
in order to force the system to prefer the fulfillment of the
constraint. After several trials we have seen that this is not
enough. Furthermore, the effect of thermal fluctuations leads
the quantum annealers solution to be almost independent
on the annealing time, reaching a plateau of the probability
p0of measuring the ground state. This is shown in Fig. 4,
where we plot p0obtained as the frequency of the ground
state appearing as outcome, measured out of 1000 reads for
different annealing times ta, calculated for a KP with N-
objects and capacity W=N.
In Fig. 5 we show also the mean value of the minimal energy
found on 20 runs of the quantum annealer, each with 1000
measurements. We see the that the result is independent of
the annealing time. A similar result was found in [9]. The
authors analyzed another combinatorial problem, the shortest
path problem, with the D-Wave quantum processor and they
did not find correspondence between the annealing time and
the frequency nor the energy distribution. This means that the
FIGURE 6: The figure shows ∆˜v,˜w, andHof Eqs. (11),(12)
and (13) respectively, between the solution found by the
quantum annealer xaand the optimal solution xopt. The
shaded regions accounts for the variances calculated over 20
runs.
behavior of the processor is not dependent on the annealing
time, although the theory says otherwise. These results allow
us to fix our annealing time to the value of 10µs.
To better analyze the quality of the results obtained by
the quantum annealer, we can introduce the following three
figures of merit that estimate the quality of the obtained
solution xawith respect to the optimal one xopt:
- the normalized knapsack value distance
∆˜v=z(xa)−z(xopt)
z(xopt), (11)
- the normalized knapsack weight
˜w=w(xa)
W, (12)
- the Hamming distance H[7]
H(xa,xopt) =MX
i=1(xi
a⊕xi
opt), (13)
where Mis the string length of the solutions and ⊕stands
for the sum modulo 2.
Fig. 6 shows these metrics as a function of the number
of qubits Mused by the quantum annealer. The width of
the shaded region is the variance calculated over 20 different
runs. We see that already for M > 8the result can differ from
the optimal solution and have a variance different from zero.
A good trade-off between the certainty of the result and
the size of the problem can be provided by the BB algorithm ,
that divides the problem into sub-problems that are described
by a lower number of qubits, for which the quantum annealer
can provide more reliable solutions.
The BB algorithm applied to the knapsack problem, as
explained in section II, explores a number of nodes that goes
asO(2N), since any time it explores a new branch, it creates
a new KP with one less object and an updated knapsack
capacity. In the toy problem we are considering, the number
6 VOLUME 4, 2016
Claudio Sanavio et al. : Hybrid classical–quantum branch–and–bound algorithm ...
FIGURE 7: The number of steps of the hybrid-BB algorithm
performed on the classical (green square points) and quantum
(red circle points) computers for a KP with W= 10 andN=
25as a function of the maximum number of qubits Mused by
the quantum annealer. The classical calls count the branching
and the bounding procedures, while the quantum calls count
the queries to the quantum annealer. This has to be compared
with the number of times the fully classical KP-BB algorithm
performs branch–and–bound (dotted horizontal blue line).
of nodes that saturate the constraint areN
W
=N!
W!(N−W)!,
that is the number of combinations with Wobjects chosen
from a set of N. This corresponds to the exploration by the
KP-BB algorithm of a number of branches
nb=WX
k=1N
k
. (14)
This value is lower than the exponential value obtained
by applying the BB algorithm depicted in Fig. 1, and the
reason why is that the optimized KP-BB algorithm makes
restrictions on more than one variable at once. But there is
no point to make use of a quantum processor, since, for each
node, all the variables have been set to a fixed value.
Here, we propose an alternative scheme: we can devise
a hybrid classical-quantum protocol by first exploiting the
advantage of the BB algorithm to reduce the problem down to
a chosen size N′, which corresponds to a number of variables
M=N′+ log2(W′+ 1), given by the number of remaining
objects N′and by the remaining loading capacity of the
knapsack W′. Then we solve the residual problem with the
quantum annealer, which might be efficient to solve problems
with a relatively small number of qubits.
We consider a KP with N= 25 objects and loading
capacity W= 10 . The problem can be described as QUBO
by a number of binary variables MP= 29 .
Fig. 7 shows the number of branches explored by the BB
algorithm (green squares) and the number of calls made to
the quantum annealer (red dots) as a function of the chosen
sizeMThe horizontal dotted blue line represents the number
of branches explored by the optimized KP-BB algorithm,
which is constant since it depends on N, W only. We see thatwhen the number of qubits M > 14, the number of times
the branch–and–bound procedure is applied in the hybrid
algorithm is lower than the number of times this is done in
the optimized KP-BB algorithm. Each reduced problem is
eventually solved by the quantum annealer. In the extreme
case of M=MP, the number of branches operated by the
classical algorithm is one, as the original problem is defined
and promptly sent to the quantum annealer.
Figs. 8a, 8b, and 8c show the metrics defined in Eq.ns
(11,12,13) for the best obtained solution xaas a function of
the number of available qubits M, for a KP with N= 25
andW= 10 . The width of the shaded region is the variance
obtained over 20 different runs. The results are compared
with a random outcome of strings, constructed as follows.
In order to make a proper comparison, we extract randomly
1000 strings, as many as the number of measurements taken
per sample. Then we choose as optimal solution the one that
has a lower energy, in analogy with the procedure of the D-
Wave machine. We then repeat the procedure 1000 times in
order to get the statistics.
We see that the outcomes of the quantum annealer are not
comparable with random guesses. Figs. 8a and 8b show that
the solution found by the D-wave machine has cost value
closer to the optimal one and loading closer to the threshold
set by the loading capacity. Finally, Fig. 8c shows that the
Hamming distance is lower than the one reached by random
outcomes.
Depending on what is our tolerance with respect to the
different quality measures ∆˜v,˜w, and H, we may decide
to restrict our problem till a certain number of qubits, thus
speeding up the resolution of the problem.
Figs. 9a, 9b, and 9c show the same experiment performed
keeping W= 10 and varying the number of objects N, using
the maximum number of necessary qubits M=N+ 4.
Although the optimal solution is never reached, the D-wave
machine performs better than random guessing even in this
case, as it is evident from the results of the metrics. In
fact, although the average ∆˜vof the D-wave outcomes is
larger then the corresponding value for random guessing,
Fig. 9a, this is mainly due to the fact that the machine tries
to satisfy the capacity constraint, as shown in Fig. 9b. Hence,
it prioritizes a lower number of objects over the desire for
a higher load value. The better performance of the D-wave
machine is captured by the lower value of the Hamming
distance in Fig. 9c.
B. THE TRAVELING SALESMAN PROBLEM
Let us move now to solve a TSP with Ncities using the
quantum annealer, by means of a hybrid classical-quantum
protocol similar (but not equal) to the one presented for the
KP.
The first step is to write the QUBO formulation of the
problem as a function of a N2binary vector xwith compo-
nents xi,j, with i, j= 1, . . . , N . We use here the formulation
suggested in Ref. [27], such that the first subscript indicates
the city, and the second indicates the step. Thus, xi,j= 1
VOLUME 4, 2016 7
Claudio Sanavio et al. : Hybrid classical–quantum branch–and–bound algorithm ...
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 8: (a)The normalized value distance ∆˜v, (b) the
normalized knapsack weight ˜w, and (c) the Hamming dis-
tance H, between the best solution obtained by the quantum
annealer and the optimal solution obtained for a KP with
N= 25 ,W= 10 , solved with the hybrid BB algorithm with
Mqubits and averaged over 20 runs. The result is compared
to what is obtained by random instances as described in the
text.
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 9: (a)The normalized value distance ∆˜v, (b) the
normalized knapsack weight ˜w, and (c) the Hamming dis-
tance H, between the best solution obtained by the quantum
annealer and the optimal solution obtained for a KP with
varying Nand fixed W= 10 , solved with the hybrid BB
algorithm with M=N+ 4 qubits and averaged over 20
runs. The result is compared to what is obtained by random
instances as described in the text.
8 VOLUME 4, 2016
Claudio Sanavio et al. : Hybrid classical–quantum branch–and–bound algorithm ...
if the i-th city is visited at step j. Followig Eqs. (3) we can
write the QUBO function (5) as [27]
QTSP(x) =NX
i,j=1CijNX
k=1xi,kxj,k+1
+λNX
i=1
1−NX
j=1xi,j2
+λNX
j=1
1−NX
i=1xi,j2
, (15)
where the choice λ >max ijCijensures that the state with
minimal energy is the optimal solution of the TSP.
The TSP-BB algorithm differs from the KP-BB algo-
rithm as it has to cross all the Ncities. The maximum
number of branches explored by the TSP-BB algorithm isPN−1
n=1(N−n)!. If we decide to stop the BB algorithm when
the total size of the problem is M2(with Mcities left), the
number of branches explored by the BB algorithm would be
at maximumPN−1
n=M(N−n)!, and the total number of calls
to the D-Wave machine will be in the worst case scenario
N!/M!. However, for the large majority of the problems we
have examined, the D-Wave processor is called a very small
number of times.
Let’s consider a scenario of N= 10 cities, all connected
together by a route, with a non symmetric cost matrix given
byCij= (i−j)modN. The optimal solution xoptof this
problem has components xij= 1 ifi=j, and 0otherwise.
This means that the nodes are crossed in the same order that
they are labeled.
We have applied the hybrid algorithm to solve this problem
and we have obtained a number of calls of the quantum
hardware equal to 10for a number of qubits between 36
(M= 6 ) and 81(M= 9 ). Clearly these numbers are
problem-dependent, but they give a good indication of the
small number of calls to the quantum hardware when the
hybrid approach is used.
For this problem, as figure of merits of the quality of the
protocol we now use:
- the travel cost of the found solution xa, normalized to the
travel cost to the optimal solution xopt:
˜c=z(xa)
z(xopt)(16)
- and the Hamming distance H=H(xa,xopt)of Eq. (13).
These two metrics are shown in Fig. 10a and Fig. 10b respec-
tively, as function of the chosen number of qubits M. As in
the previous section, the results are compared with a random
path throughout the cities. Contrary to the KP problem, the
random solutions can be chosen here to strictly satisfy the
constraints, since it suffices to generate the solution with a
random ordering of the Mcities.
The normalized travel cost is lower than the one obtained
for random paths for all the instances analyzed, up to a
maximum of 100 qubits ( M= 10 ). We see that the optimal
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 10: (a)The normalized travel cost ˜c, (b) the Ham-
ming distance H, between the best solution obtained by the
quantum annealer and the optimal solution, obtained for a
TSP with Ncities solved with the hybrid BB algorithm with
M2qubits and averaged over 20 runs. The result is compared
to what is obtained by random instances as described in the
text.
solution has been obtained only for the cases with M= 3,4,
whereas for larger TSP the D-wave machine was not able
to find it. Also, comparing Figs. 10a and 10b, we see that
the Hamming distance alone does not effectively measure the
quality of the solution. Already for a TSP with M= 7cities,
the results are not distinguishable from random outcomes in
terms of H, yet they exhibit a significantly lower travel cost
value.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have investigated the resolution of two bi-
nary linear problems, the knapsack problem and the traveling
salesman problem, that are known to be NP-hard. Those are
often solved with the branch–and–bound algorithm that we
have described in Sec. II. After introducing the two problems
we have moved our attention to the quantum annealer in
Sec.III, that is a quantum computer that offers a global
method for resolution of binary linear problems. In this
VOLUME 4, 2016 9
Claudio Sanavio et al. : Hybrid classical–quantum branch–and–bound algorithm ...
work we have merged the classical and quantum method for
resolution of those NP-hard problems, in order to show the
advantage of a hybrid approach. In fact, branch–and–bounds
algorithm do not offer a significant speed up with respect
to brute force strategies, whereas quantum annealers suffer
from a low reliability when the number of instances is large.
However, when merged together, branch–and–bound defines
a new problem with a smaller size that can be handled by the
global quantum solver. Although there is a long way to go
with quantum annealers, we believe this work shows a good
strategy to use them.
APPENDIX A
QUANTUM ANNEALERS
Quantum annealers are a class of quantum computers which
make use of a time-dependent evolution Hamiltonian to solve
combinatorial problems.
The adiabatic theorem [17], [18] is the basis of the com-
putation with quantum annealers. Suppose that a quantum
system is subject to a time evolving Hamiltonian H(t), and
at time t, the system is in the j-th eigenstate |ϵj(t)⟩, such
thatH(t)|ϵj(t)⟩=ϵj|ϵj(t)⟩. The eigenvalues ϵjare sorted
in increasing order and non-degenerate. The adiabatic theo-
rem states the if the evolution is performed slowly enough ,
the quantum system stays in the evolved j-th instantaneous
eigenstate of the Hamiltonian H(t). Understanding what
"slowly enough” means is the role of the adiabatic theorem.
Several versions of the theorem have been developed during
the years, depending on the initial conditions of the system.
The Kato version [17] of the adiabatic theorem gives a lower
bound for the annealing time tain terms of the first and
second derivatives of the Hamiltonian H(t), and in terms
of the minimum value assumed during the evolution by the
energy gap ∆ij=|ϵj−ϵi|,∀i̸=j. An approximate version
of the theorem yields the inequality [18]
max
s∈[0,1]|⟨ϵi(s)|∂sH(s)|ϵj(s)⟩|
∆ij(s)2≤ta,∀i̸=j. (17)
Since we are interested in the ground state, for our pur-
poses, we consider only the energy gap between the instanta-
neous ground state and the first energy level ∆ =|ϵ1−ϵ0|.
The time-dependent Hamiltonian H(t)is composed by
two terms, namely
H(t) = [1 −f(t/ta)]H0+f(t/ta)H1, (18)
where H0andH1are two non-commuting Hamiltonians and
tais the total annealing time. The evolution function f, also
called schedule, is such that f(s) : [0,1]→[0,1],f(0) = 0
andf(1) = 1 .
The Hamiltonian H0has a ground state that is easy to
prepare, whereas H1is a Hamiltonian for which the ground
state corresponds to the classical optimal solution of the
combinatorial problem. Thus H1is the term that encodes our
optimization problem.At time t= 0 the system is prepared in the ground state
of the Hamiltonian H0. For a sufficiently long t=ta, the
adiabatic theorem ensures that the state of the system is
the solution of our classical problem, that we will recover
measuring the system at this time.
The energy gap plays a crucial role in adiabatic quantum
computation, and understanding how it scales with problem
size is essential. The efficiency of a quantum annealer com-
pared to a classical algorithm largely hinges on the scaling
of the band gap. However, it is important to note that the
schedule influences the derivative of the Hamiltonian and,
consequently, impacts the satisfaction of the inequality (17).
A modification to the schedule could either enhance or di-
minish the quantum annealer’s performance. In this study,
we focus on the linear schedule f(t/ta) = t/tadeferring
optimal schedule analysis to future research.
In order to understand the computational advantage of the
quantum annealer we need to define the quantum speed up .
One definition [18] takes into account the speed up with
respect to existing algorithms. Another useful definition is the
limited quantum speed up [18], which compares a quantum
algorithm with its classical analogue, that is an algorithm
that proceeds through the same steps in the classical regimes.
The classical version of the adiabatic quantum computation is
the simulated annealing where the thermal fluctuations allow
the exploration of different solutions. Both the classical and
quantum annealing algorithms usually find approximations to
the global solutions, although we have evidence that quantum
annealing reaches the global solutions more often [23] and
with shorter annealing time [24]–[26].
APPENDIX B
THE ENERGY GAP
In this appendix we consider the Knapsack problem with
fixed loading capacity Wand increasing number of objects
N≥W. As in we did in the main text, all the objects have
weight 1 and they are sorted by increasing value vi=i,
fori= 1, . . . , N . The number of qubits needed to describe
the problem is M=N+⌈log2(W+ 1)⌉. In order to be
general, we have calculated the minimum value of the energy
band gap ∆, considering a one to one embedding into the
hardware and considering the schedule functions A, B of
Eq.(18) and their magnitudes as provided by D-Wave [19].
Fig. 11 shows the minimum of the band gap that is reached
during the annealing process. From our simulations, we see
that the minimum of the band gap goes as a polynomial of
the number of qubits ∆E∝M−c. The polynomial scaling
of∆Eis promising, as it reflects the polynomial scaling of
the annealing time needed to find the optimal solution.
However, this result is affected by the topology of the D-
Wave quantum annealer. In fact, the results that we found are
applicable to an ideal completely connected quantum com-
puter, where Hamiltonian (18) can be directly implemented.
Because of the constrained topology [19] of the machine,
several ancillary qubits are used to embed the problem into
the quantum annealer, therefore changing the scaling of the
10 VOLUME 4, 2016
Claudio Sanavio et al. : Hybrid classical–quantum branch–and–bound algorithm ...
FIGURE 11: The minimum of the ground state energy band
gap∆Evarying the number of qubits Mfor some KPs with
fixed loading capacity W.
band gap. In this work we have used the embedding tool
that is implemented in the SDK D-Wave Ocean. Hence we
averaged the results over 20 runs, each with a different
embedding onto the machine.
Because of the embedding, We can not use the results that we
have shown in this appendix to obtain the minimum value of
the annealing time through the adiabatic theorem. However,
we believe they provide an understanding of the problem and
an hardware-agnostic analysis of the energy band gap.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is funded by the International Foundation Big
Data and Artificial Intelligence for Human Development
(IFAB) through the project “Quantum Computing for Appli-
cations”. E. E. is partially supported by INFN through the
project “QUANTUM”. C. S. and E. E. acknowledge financial
support from the National Centre for HPC, Big Data and
Quantum Computing (Spoke 10, CN00000013).
REFERENCES
[1] A. H. Land and A. G. Doig, “An Automatic Method of Solving Discrete
Programming Problems,” Econometrica, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 497–520, 1960,
doi: 10.2307/1910129.
[2] S. Martello and P. Toth, Knapsack problems: algorithms and computer
implementations. Chichester ; New York: J. Wiley &Sons, 1990.
[3] P. Toth and D. Vigo, Eds., The vehicle routing problem. Philadelphia, Pa:
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2002.
[4] G. Laporte and Y . Nobert, “A branch and bound algorithm for the capac-
itated vehicle routing problem,” OR Spektrum, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 77–85,
Jun. 1983, doi: 10.1007/BF01720015.
[5] P. J. Kolesar, “A Branch and Bound Algorithm for the Knapsack Prob-
lem,” Management Science, vol. 13, no. 9, pp. 723–735, May 1967, doi:
10.1287/mnsc.13.9.723.
[6] G. Laporte, “The traveling salesman problem: An overview of exact and
approximate algorithms,” European Journal of Operational Research, vol.
59, no. 2, Art. no. 2, Jun. 1992, doi: 10.1016/0377-2217(92)90138-Y .
[7] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum
Information: 10th Anniversary Edition. Cambridge University Press, 2010.
[Online]. Available: https://books.google.it/books?id=-s4DEy7o-a0C
[8] L. Pusey-Nazzaro and P. Date, “Adiabatic Quantum Optimization Fails to
Solve the Knapsack Problem.” arXiv:2008.07456, [quant-ph] (2020)
[9] T. Krauss and J. McCollum, “Solving the Network Shortest Path Problem
on a Quantum Annealer,” IEEE Transactions on Quantum Engineering,
vol. 1, pp. 1–12, 2020, doi: 10.1109/TQE.2020.3021921.[10] G. Rosenberg, M. Vazifeh, B. Woods, and E. Haber, “Building an iterative
heuristic solver for a quantum annealer,” Comput Optim Appl, vol. 65, no.
3, pp. 845–869, Dec. 2016, doi: 10.1007/s10589-016-9844-y.
[11] C. McGeoch, P. Farré, and W. Bernoudy, "D-Wave Hybrid Solver Service
+ Advantage: Technology Update", Tech. Rep. (D-Wave Systems Inc,
Burnaby, BC, Canada, 2020), D-Wave User Manual 09-1109A-V .
[12] D-Wave Systems, "Technical Description of the D-Wave Quantum Pro-
cessing Unit", Tech. Rep. (D-Wave Systems Inc., Burnaby, BC, Canada,
2020) D-Wave User Manual 09-1109A-V .
[13] K. Boothby, P. Bunyk, J. Raymond, and A. Roy, "Next Generation
Topology of D-Wave Quantum Processors", arXiv:2003.00133 [quant-ph]
(2020).
[14] D. S. Johnson, “Combinatorial Optimization: Algorithms and Complexity.
By Christos H. Papadimitriou and Kenneth Steiglitz,” The American
Mathematical Monthly, vol. 91, no. 3, pp. 209–211, Mar. 1984, doi:
10.1080/00029890.1984.11971383.
[15] G. Dantzig, R. Fulkerson, and S. Johnson, “Solution of a Large-Scale
Traveling-Salesman Problem,” OR, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 393–410, Nov. 1954,
doi: 10.1287/opre.2.4.393.
[16] M. H. Amin, “Searching for quantum speedup in quasistatic quantum
annealers,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 92, no. 5, Art. no. 5, Nov. 2015, doi:
10.1103/PhysRevA.92.052323.
[17] T. Kato, “On the Adiabatic Theorem of Quantum Mechanics,” J. Phys.
Soc. Jpn., vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 435–439, Nov. 1950, doi: 10.1143/JPSJ.5.435.
[18] T. Albash and D. A. Lidar, “Adiabatic Quantum Computing,” Rev. Mod.
Phys., vol. 90, no. 1, Art. no. 1, Jan. 2018, doi: 10.1103/RevMod-
Phys.90.015002.
[19] R. Harris et al., “Experimental investigation of an eight-qubit unit cell in
a superconducting optimization processor,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 82, no. 2, p.
024511, Jul. 2010, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.82.024511.
[20] M. W. Johnson et al., “Quantum annealing with manufactured spins,”
Nature, vol. 473, no. 7346, Art. no. 7346, May 2011, doi: 10.1038/na-
ture10012.
[21] S. Boixo, T. Albash, F. M. Spedalieri, N. Chancellor, and D. A. Lidar, “Ex-
perimental signature of programmable quantum annealing,” Nat Commun,
vol. 4, no. 1, Art. no. 1, Jun. 2013, doi: 10.1038/ncomms3067.
[22] T. Lanting et al., “Entanglement in a Quantum Annealing Processor,”
Phys. Rev. X, vol. 4, no. 2, p. 021041, May 2014, doi: 10.1103/Phys-
RevX.4.021041.
[23] T. Kadowaki and H. Nishimori, “Quantum Annealing in the Transverse
Ising Model,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 5355–5363, Nov. 1998, doi:
10.1103/PhysRevE.58.5355.
[24] S. Suzuki, “A comparison of classical and quantum annealing dynamics,”
J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., vol. 143, p. 012002, Dec. 2009, doi: 10.1088/1742-
6596/143/1/012002.
[25] G. E. Santoro and E. Tosatti, “Optimization using quantum mechan-
ics: quantum annealing through adiabatic evolution,” J. Phys. A: Math.
Theor., vol. 41, no. 20, p. 209801, May 2008, doi: 10.1088/1751-
8121/41/20/209801.
[26] B. Heim, T. F. Rønnow, S. V . Isakov, and M. Troyer, “Quantum versus
classical annealing of Ising spin glasses,” Science, vol. 348, no. 6231, pp.
215–217, Apr. 2015, doi: 10.1126/science.aaa4170.
[27] A. Lucas, “Ising formulations of many NP problems,” Frontiers in
Physics, vol. 2, 2014, Accessed: Apr. 28, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fphy.2014.00005
VOLUME 4, 2016 11