
--- PAGE 1 ---
Quantum random access memory: a survey and critique
Samuel Jaques1,2 and Arthur G. Rattew3
1Department of Combinatorics and Optimization, University of Waterloo, 200 University Ave W, Waterloo, Canada
2Institute for Quantum computing, University of Waterloo, 200 University Ave W, Waterloo Canada
3Department of Materials, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PH, United Kingdom
Quantum
random-access
memory
(QRAM) is a mechanism to access data
(quantum or classical) based on addresses
which are themselves a quantum state.
QRAM
has
a
long
and
controversial
history, and here we survey and expand
arguments
and
constructions
for
and
against.
We
use
two
primary
categories
of
QRAM from the literature:
(1) active,
which requires external intervention and
control for each QRAM query (e.g.
the
error-corrected circuit model),
and (2)
passive, which requires no external input
or energy once the query is initiated. In
the active model, there is a powerful op-
portunity cost argument: in many appli-
cations, one could repurpose the control
hardware for the qubits in the QRAM (or
the qubits themselves) to run an extremely
parallel classical algorithm to achieve the
same results just as fast. We apply these
arguments in detail to quantum linear al-
gebra and prove that most asymptotic
quantum advantage disappears with active
QRAM systems, with some nuance related
to the architectural assumptions.
Escaping
the
constraints
of
active
QRAM requires ballistic computation with
passive memory, which creates an array
of dubious physical assumptions, which we
examine in detail.
Considering these de-
tails, in everything we could find, all non-
circuit QRAM proposals fall short in one
aspect or another.
In summary, we conclude that cheap,
asymptotically scalable passive QRAM is
unlikely with existing proposals, due to
fundamental obstacles that we highlight.
Samuel Jaques: sejaques@uwaterloo.ca
Arthur G. Rattew: arthur.rattew@materials.ox.ac.uk
These obstacles are deeply rooted in the
requirements of QRAM, but are not prov-
ably inevitable; we hope that our results
will help guide research into QRAM tech-
nologies that circumvent or mitigate these
obstacles.
Finally, circuit-based QRAM
still helps in many applications, and so we
additionally provide a survey of state-of-
the-art techniques as a resource for algo-
rithm designers using QRAM.
1
Introduction
Computers are machines to process data, and
so access to data is a critical function.
Quan-
tum computers are no exception.
Specialized
memory-access devices (e.g., RAM) are now com-
monplace in classical computers because they are
so useful.
It thus seems intuitive that future
quantum computers will have similar devices.
Unfortunately for quantum computers, it’s not
clear that the analogy holds.
Memory access,
classical or quantum, requires a number of gates
that grows proportional to the memory size. For
a classical computer, manufacturing gates is gen-
erally a fixed cost and we care more about the
runtime (though this assumption starts to break
down with large scale, high-performance comput-
ing). In contrast, gates in most quantum tech-
nologies are active interventions, requiring energy
or computational power to enact.
The foundational work on QRAM, [52], at-
tempts to break from this model and imagines
passive components to enact the memory, such
that after a signal is sent into the device, it prop-
agates without external control (i.e. ballistically)
to complete the memory access. This would be
more efficient, but might not be realistic.
QRAM has sparked significant controversy and
yet numerous applications presume its existence.
Because of this, results are scattered.
Circuit-
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
1
arXiv:2305.10310v2  [quant-ph]  9 Nov 2025

--- PAGE 2 ---
based QRAM, where one accepts a high gate cost,
can be still be useful, so optimized techniques
appear as intermediate results in subject-specific
works. Here we attempt to survey and collect all
such results.
Similarly, there is a broad literature of at-
tempts to construct QRAM (in theory or ex-
periment) and many published criticisms of it.
This paper aims to unify the existing criticisms
and provide new ones, and consider all existing
QRAM proposals in light of these criticisms.
1.1
Summary
To frame this paper, we first summarize existing
arguments for QRAM and try to explain, concep-
tually, how to think about the nature of a QRAM
device.
Classically we are used to “gates” being
static physical components that data propagates
through, just as depicted in circuit diagrams.
Applying that intuition to quantum computing is
unjustified. In contrast, the memory peripheral
framework of [63] models quantum computing
like Figure 1, where data (in the form of qubits)
are static physical components, and gates are op-
erations that a controller applies to the data. In
this framework a quantum computer is a physical
object (e.g., some Hilbert space) called a mem-
ory peripheral that evolves independently under
some Hamiltonian. There is also a memory con-
troller that can choose to intervene on the ob-
ject, either by applying a quantum channel from
some defined set, or modifying the Hamiltonian.
This more accurately reflects today’s supercon-
ducting and trapped-ion quantum computers, as
well as surface code architectures of the future
where classical co-processors will be necessary to
handle error syndrome data, possibly in addition
to scheduling and applying gates.
While future devices may drastically reduce
the overhead of each operation, there will still be
some level of computational power necessary to
manage each intervention in the device. As this
paper will focus primarily on asymptotics, this
distinction will matter less; e.g., a laser’s micro-
controller is not much different than any other
application-specific integrated circuit.
Overall, this framework highlights a view of a
quantum computer as a peripheral of a classical
device.
We imagine a quantum computer as a
collection of quantum devices with many associ-
ated classical computers built into the architec-
ture whose purpose is to manage the quantum
devices.
The crux of QRAM is that if a query state
is a superposition over all addresses, then for
the device or circuit to respond appropriately,
it must perform a memory access over all ad-
dresses simultaneously.
While “it performs all
possible computations at once” is a classic mis-
understanding of quantum computing, it applies
more directly to QRAM: imagining the memory
laid out in space, a QRAM access must transfer
some information to each of the bits in memory
if it hopes to correctly perform a superposition
of memory accesses. This sets up an immediate
contrast to classical memory, which can instead
adaptively direct a signal through different parts
of a memory circuit.
In the memory peripheral framework, we need
to apply gates for every possible pattern of mem-
ory access, and since each gate requires some ac-
tion from the controller – be it time, computa-
tion, or energy – the relevant cost is proportional
to the total size of the memory. The problems
with high time or energy costs are obvious, but
Figure 1 highlights that a computational cost is
really an opportunity cost. If we have a dedicated
co-processor for every O(1) qubits, could they do
something besides run the quantum computer?
This captures arguments against particular
uses of QRAM. If we are allowed to reprogram
the control circuitry, then:
• two-to-one collision finding is just as fast for
the quantum computer or its controller [16]
• claw finding is faster for the controller than
the quantum computer [63]
• the quantum advantage for matrix inversion
drops from exponential to (at best) polyno-
mial according to [1, 39] (see Section 4 for
more nuance)
In short, a massive quantum computer implies
a massive classical co-processor to control it, and
that co-processor can quickly solve many prob-
lems on its own.
This holds for what [39] calls “active” QRAM.
Proponents of QRAM can then argue that this
is the wrong way to conceptualize QRAM. In
classical computers, RAM is a separate device,
manufactured differently than the CPU, designed
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
Figure 1: An illustration of a quantum computer in the memory peripheral model [63]. Classical controllers are the
chips on the top, which send signals (in red) to qubits (in blue).
specifically to perform memory accesses. From
the CPU’s perspective, it sends a signal into the
RAM and waits for the RAM to process that sig-
nal on its own.
An analogous quantum device
– what [1] denotes as “passive” QRAM – would
not incur the costs of external control, but would
need incredible engineering to function correctly
without that control.
The memory peripheral framework also al-
lows more complicated Hamiltonians and longer
evolution to capture this situation.
This re-
flects “ballistic” computation, where some envi-
ronment is prepared and then allowed to propa-
gate on its own. Today’s boson sampling exper-
iments are more like this: the classical control
(e.g. motors or humans) must establish the op-
tical layout and then inject a photon, but after
this setup, computation will proceed without any
further intervention.
The main technical contributions of this paper
are a careful analysis of the requirements and as-
sumptions of this other perspective. In short, we
argue that for passive QRAM:
• If the QRAM requires no intervention, it is
“ballistic”, and must be described by a single
time-independent Hamiltonian;
• No intervention means no active error cor-
rection, and hence each physical component
must intrinsically have near-zero noise lev-
els;
• Unless the device is carefully designed to
limit error propagation, the physical com-
ponent error rates must be problematically
low;
• To be compatible with the rest of a fault tol-
erant computation, we need some way to ap-
ply the QRAM, which (in the passive case)
acts only on physical qubits, to the logical
qubits in an error corrected code;
• In particular, a QRAM gate cannot be tele-
ported, so we must resort to other techniques
which risk decohering the state.
In many ways the comparison to classical RAM
is inaccurate, and passive QRAM faces daunt-
ing engineering challenges. In our opinion, these
challenges are probably insurmountable, in which
case quantum memory would always need to be
active, and thus access to N bits of QRAM would
always have a total (parallellizable) cost propor-
tional to N or higher.
We stress that QRAM can still be a useful
tool: in numerous applications in chemistry and
quantum arithmetic, such as those in Section 3,
QRAM can offload expensive computations to a
classical co-processor, providing a benefit that
exceeds the overall access cost.
1.2
Outline
We first define our models of quantum computa-
tion and the definitions of QRAM in Section 2.
There we summarize the different names and no-
tions of this device from the literature, to unify
the discussion.
Section 3 discusses the main uses of QRAM,
and the requirements that each application places
on the QRAM device, and the scale they require.
Section 4 analyses the implications of various
QRAM models for the application of quantum
linear algebra. We prove that in many regimes,
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
an active QRAM cannot have quantum advan-
tage over a parallel classical algorithm for a cer-
tain general linear algebra tasks.
Then in Section 5 we give state-of-the-art ex-
amples of circuit QRAM from the literature.
These are circuits to perform QRAM that are
intended to work in the fault-tolerant layer by
building the QRAM gate out of a more funda-
mental gate set. As expected, the cost is propor-
tional to the number of bits of memory, and we
show a tight lower bound for this.
Section 6 then explores the concept of pas-
sive hardware-QRAM, i.e., a device tailor-made
to perform QRAM accesses without intervention,
with Section 7 focusing specifically on errors.
These describe the precise errors listed in the in-
troduction.
While some of these issues are quantum-
specific, others seem to also apply to classical
RAM, which we know is a feasible technology. In
Section 8, we apply the same arguments to clas-
sical RAM. For each argument, either it does not
apply because classical memory and its access is
an easier task, or the analysis and real-world use
of memory in large-scale devices already accounts
for the costs we describe.
We survey approaches to the bucket-brigade in
Section 9, noting how each different proposal fails
in one or more of the criteria above. Section 10
describes 3 other architectures and one error cor-
rection method, all of which also fall short.
While Section 2 and Section 3 will be useful for
all readers, those interested in using QRAM in
their algorithms should focus on Section 5. Sec-
tion 4 is intended for readers focusing on quan-
tum linear algebra. Those interested in the ar-
guments against QRAM should read Section 6,
Section 7, and Section 8. Readers already famil-
iar with this debate might focus on the original
results, such as Theorem 7.1, the critiques of spe-
cific schemes in Section 9 and Section 10, and the
analysis of quantum linear algebra in Section 4.
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Definitions and Notation
5
2.1
QRAM Definitions . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Routing and Readout
. . . . . . .
6
2.3
Alternate Notation . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Applications
7
4
Case Study: Quantum Linear Algebra
9
4.1
Input Model and Matrix Functions
9
4.2
Dequantization . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.3
QRAM versus Parallel Classical
Computation . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4
Quantum
Linear
Algebra
with
Noisy QRAM . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
Circuit QRAM
14
5.1
Lower Bounds . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.2
Unary Encoding
. . . . . . . . . .
16
5.3
Bucket-Brigade . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.4
Select-Swap . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.5
Parallel QRAM . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.6
Data Structures . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6
Hardware QRAM
20
6.1
Active vs. Passive QRAM . . . . .
21
6.2
Path Independence . . . . . . . . .
21
6.3
Hamiltonian Construction . . . . .
22
7
Errors
23
7.1
Error-corrected components . . . .
23
7.2
Error Correction
. . . . . . . . . .
24
7.3
Gate Teleportation . . . . . . . . .
24
8
Classical RAM
26
8.1
Area-Time Metric
. . . . . . . . .
26
8.2
Active Components . . . . . . . . .
27
8.3
Error Propagation and Correction
29
8.4
Latency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
9
Bucket-Brigade QRAM
30
9.1
Construction
. . . . . . . . . . . .
30
9.2
Reversibility . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
9.3
Proposed Technologies . . . . . . .
31
9.4
Error Rates . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
10 Other Proposals
33
10.1 Time-bins . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
10.2 Quantum Optical Fanout
. . . . .
35
10.3 Phase Gate Fanout . . . . . . . . .
36
10.4 Derangement Codes
. . . . . . . .
37
10.5 Two-Level Quantum Walkers . . .
37
11 Discussion
38
References
39
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
A Linear Algebra Proofs
46
B Proof of Theorem 5.1
48
C Proof of No Distillation
49
2
Definitions and Notation
We will frequently use asymptotic notation.
Writing f(n) ∈O(g(n)) means that g(n) is an
asymptotic upper bound for f, f(n) ∈Ω(g(n))
means g(n) is an asymptotic lower bound, and
f(n) ∈Θ(g(n)) means both.
f(n) ∈o(g(n))
means that limn→∞
f(n)
g(n) = 0. A tilde over any of
these means we are ignoring logarithmic factors,
e.g.,
˜O(g(n)) means O(g(n) logk(n)) for some
constant k.
We may write f(n) = O(g(n)) to
mean the same as f(n) ∈O(g(n)).
2.1
QRAM Definitions
We will follow the notation of Kuperberg [72],
who proposes a taxonomy of four types of mem-
ory, based on the product of two criteria:
• Does the device store classical or quantum
data? (CM for classical memory or QM for
quantum memory)
• Can the device access this data in superpo-
sition or not? (CRA for classical access or
QRA for quantum access)
The “R” stands for “Random”, though we will
ignore this because a memory device does not
need to gracefully handle random access patterns
to fit the definitions.
This results in four types of memory:
CRACM (Classical access classical mem-
ory):
This is classical memory that can only be
accessed classically, i.e., the memory we are all fa-
miliar with today. Kuperberg does not actually
distinguish the speed of memory access.
Com-
paring quantum and classical, we do not really
care. In this sense DRAM, flash memory, hard
disk drives, and even magnetic tapes can all be
considered CRACM. We discuss more properties
of CRACM in Section 8.
CRAQM (Classical access quantum mem-
ory):
Here we have quantum memory, but
which can only be accessed classically. The no-
tion of “access” is somewhat fuzzy: obviously a
classical controller cannot read quantum mem-
ory without destructively measuring it. Our no-
tion of access will be more akin to “addressable”,
meaning the classical computer can find the re-
quired bits of quantum memory. This means es-
sentially all qubits are CRAQM, since any quan-
tum circuit will require a classical controller to
find the necessary qubits to apply the gates for
that circuit.
Classically addressing qubits is a challenging
and extremely important problem (e.g., [64]), but
it is fundamentally different and mostly unre-
lated to what this paper addresses.
QRACM (Quantum access classical mem-
ory):
We formally define “QRACM” as follows:
Definition 1. Quantum random-access classical
memory (QRACM) is a collection of unitarities
UQRACM(T), where T ∈{0, 1}N is a table of
data, such that for all states |i⟩in the compu-
tational basis, 0 ≤i ≤N −1,
UQRACM(T) |i⟩|0⟩= |i⟩|Ti⟩.
(1)
Here T is the classical memory and |i⟩is an ad-
dress input. We call the register with |i⟩the ad-
dress register and the bit which transforms from
|0⟩to |Ti⟩the output register (recall Ti ∈{0, 1}).
Since UQRACM(T) is unitary, superposition ac-
cess follows by linearity. Our definition specifies
a unitary action, but we do not require the device
to be unitary: a quantum channel whose action
is identical to (or approximates) conjugation by
UQRACM(T) will still be considered QRACM (for
example, the method in [19] uses measurement-
based uncomputation).
In this definition, the table T parameterizes
the unitaries, since QRACM must take some clas-
sical data as input. This means that there is no
single QRACM “gate”: there is a family of gates,
parameterized by T. In fact, since T has N en-
tries of {0, 1}, there are 2N possible memories.
In some literature the table is written as a func-
tion f so that Ti = f(i). In this case, the QRAM
might be written as an oracle Of implementing
the mapping Of |x⟩|0⟩= |x⟩|f(x)⟩.
For some
QRACM methods, the table does not need to be
in classical memory if f is efficiently computable.
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
We take N as the number of elements in the
table that the QRACM must access, which we
will sometimes call words (for cases where they
are larger than single bits). This means the ad-
dress register has n := ⌈lg N⌉qubits. Other pa-
pers choose a notation focusing on n, the number
of qubits in the address, so that the number of
words in the table is 2n (and the number of pos-
sible tables is 22n). Using n and 2n emphasizes
that, for certain algorithms, the size of the table
will be exponential compared to other aspects of
the input and running time. We will mainly use
N and ⌈lg N⌉since the classical table must be
input to the algorithm, and therefore anything
O(N) is linear in the input size, but we use n
throughout as shorthand for ⌈lg N⌉.
Of course most applications require the ele-
ments of T to be more than single bits, but con-
catenating single-qubit QRACM gives multi-bit
QRACM.
QRAQM (Quantum access quantum mem-
ory)
: We formally define this as:
Definition 2. Quantum random-access quantum
memory (QRAQM) is a collection of unitaries
UQRAQM(N), where N ∈N, such that for all
states |i⟩with 0 ≤i ≤N −1 and all N-qubit
states |T0, T1, . . . , TN−1⟩(referred to as the data
register, where T0, . . . , TN−1 is a bitstring),
UQRAQM |i⟩|0⟩|T0, . . . , TN−1⟩= |i⟩|Ti⟩|T0, . . . , TN−1⟩
(2)
The difference now is that the memory itself
is a quantum state, meaning we could have a su-
perposition of different tables. Here the gate is
implicitly parameterized by the table size, and
needs to suffice for all possible states of that size.
This definition only shows a unitary that can
read the quantum memory, but one can show
that unitarity forces
UQRAQM |i⟩|1⟩|T0, . . . , TN−1⟩= |i⟩|1 ⊕Ti⟩|T0, . . . , TN−1⟩
(3)
and from this, one can conjugate UQRAQM(N)
with Hadamard gates on all qubits in the output
and data registers to construct a write operation.
The literature still has some ambiguity about
this definition. For example, we could define a
SWAP-QRAQM such that
US−QRAQRM |i⟩|ψ⟩|ϕ0⟩. . . |ϕN−1⟩
= |i⟩|ϕi⟩|ϕ0⟩. . . |ϕi−1⟩|ψ⟩|ϕi+1⟩|ϕN−1⟩.
(4)
SWAP-QRAQM is equivalent to the previous
read-and-write QRAQM, if some ancilla qubits
and local gates are used.
2.2
Routing and Readout
Imprecisely, QRACM and QRAQM have two
tasks: the first is routing and the second is read-
out.
By analogy, consider retrieving data classically
from a network database. A request for the data
will contain some address, and this will need to
be appropriately routed to a physical location,
such as a specific sector on a specific drive in a
specific building.
Once the signal reaches that
location, the data must be copied out before it
can be returned. For example, this could involve
reading the magnetization of the hard drive.
Difficulties can arise from either routing or
readout, but we stress that both are necessary.
[72] states “Our own suggestion for a QRACM
architecture is to express classical data with a
2-dimensional grid of pixels that rotate the po-
larization of light. (A liquid crystal display has
a layer that does exactly that.)
When a pho-
ton passes through such a grid, its polarization
qubit reads the pixel grid in superposition.” This
seems to satisfy the requirements of the readout,
but does not address routing: how do we gener-
ate the photon in such a way that its direction is
precisely entangled with the address register, so
that for state |i⟩, the photon travels to the ith
pixel in this grid?
Generally, the routing problem seems more dif-
ficult. If we have a device that routes data such
that the physical location of some aspect of the
device (such as the photon described above) be-
comes entangled with the input state given as
address, then readout becomes relatively sim-
ple. A readout with the polarization mechanism
described above could give QRACM, or a se-
ries of parallel controlled SWAP gates could give
QRAQM. Thus, we mainly focus on routing in
this paper.
For that reason, we also will use the term
“QRAM” to refer to a routing technology that
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
would work for either QRACM or QRAQM with
only modest changes to the readout mechanism
(the bucket-brigade routing from [60] is a perfect
example).
2.3
Alternate Notation
“QRAM” is used inconsistently throughout the
literature. It is sometimes used for QRAQM or
QRACM (e.g. [94] uses “QRAM” for both). It
is also sometimes meant to specifically refer to
an operation that implements QRACM, but via
a single gate.
“QROM” has been used to refer to QRACM
implemented as a circuit (e.g., from Clifford+T
gates) (e.g., [8]). QRACM must be read-only, so
using QRAM to refer to QRAQM and QROM to
refer to QRACM would be a consistent alterna-
tive notation; however, since the literature uses
QRAM to refer to both kinds, we opt against
this.
In classical computing, devices such as hard
drives or tapes can implement the functional-
ity of random-access memory, though the ac-
cess times are longer and more variable than de-
vices such as DRAM or flash memory.
Analo-
gously, different proposals achieve the same re-
quired function of QRACM – to access memory in
superposition – but with radically different costs
and access times.
To be more precise than this, we will use cir-
cuit-QRAM to refer to proposals to construct su-
perposition access using a standard gate set, es-
pecially Clifford+T.
We will use hardware-QRAM to refer to pro-
posals for QRAM consisting of a specialized de-
vice. Following [1, 39], we further categorize into
active hardware-QRAM, which requires Ω(N)
active interventions from the classical controller
for each access, and passive hardware-QRAM,
which requires o(N) active interventions.
If we imagine memory access by routing an ad-
dress through a binary tree, the tree must have
N −1 nodes (if N is a power of 2), and each node
must do some computation on the incoming sig-
nal. The difference between active and passive
hardware-QRAM is whether that computation
requires some external process to make it hap-
pen, or whether it proceeds on its own with no
external intervention.
Related
Work.
The concurrent survey in
[94] explains some approaches to QRAQM and
QRACM, though they do not consider the phys-
ical costs in the same way as our work. Specif-
ically, they claim classical RAM requires O(2n)
“gate activations” and quantum RAM requires
O(n), without defining a notion of “gate activa-
tions”. Arguably the real situation is reversed:
when each gate in a QRAM circuit requires exter-
nal intervention then it costs O(2n), and classical
RAM only needs to dissipate energy from O(n)
gates (see Section 8 for a more nuanced picture).
State preparation is a slight generalization of
QRAM, with a circuit that performs
|x⟩|0⟩7→|x⟩|ψx⟩
(5)
for some collection of states |ψx⟩for x
∈
{0, . . . , N −1}. Typically we assume a unitary
Ux for each x, such that Ux |0⟩= |ψx⟩. QRACM
is the special case where |ψx⟩= |f(x)⟩(e.g. a
specific computational basis state).
The techniques for state preparation and
QRAM are generally the same, e.g.
the tech-
niques of [114] are similar to bucket-brigade
QRAM (Section 5.3) and [104] is like a select-
swap QRAM (Section 5.4) using phase rotations.
3
Applications
Mainly as motivation for later discussions, we
note some leading applications of QRAM. A key
point for all of these applications is that the com-
peting classical algorithms parallelize almost per-
fectly, and hence the active QRAM opportunity
cost arguments apply fully.
Optimizing calculations.
Many quantum al-
gorithms perform complicated classical functions
in superposition, such as modular exponentia-
tion in Shor’s algorithm or inverse square roots
in chemistry problems. Recent techniques [8, 12,
19, 45, 47, 57] choose instead to classically pre-
compute the result for a large portion of inputs,
and then use QRACM to look up the result.
The scale of QRACM here is around 215 to 225
bits of memory. Further, the overall error rate
can afford to be fairly high. For example, using
windowed elliptic curve point addition in Shor’s
algorithm requires only about 17 applications of
the QRACM gate, so even if each one has much
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
higher error than other fundamental gates, the
overall algorithm will still succeed.
Systematic QRACM errors are also less impor-
tant in this context, as the inputs are generally
large superpositions, so mistakes in a small pro-
portion of inputs will only affect a small fraction
of the superposition.
The referenced works already assign an O(N)
cost for QRACM look-ups, meaning that the ar-
guments against cheap QRACM in this paper
have no effect on their conclusions.
Cheap QRACM would also not drastically re-
duce the costs.
First, for factoring, each table
is distinct. Since the classical controller requires
at least N operations to construct a table of N
words, asymptotically the cost of using QRACM
in this context is already proportional to N just
to construct each QRACM table. While this clas-
sical pre-processing is likely much cheaper than
a T-gate, it limits how much computation can be
offset.
In contrast,
quantum chemistry that uses
QRACM to look up the value of a function of
Coulumb potential [19] will only have to access
one table. Thus, cheap QRACM would reduce
the cost of these algorithms, but it would only
be a polynomial factor.
Dihedral
Hidden
Subgroup.
Kuperberg’s
algorithm for solving the dihedral hidden sub-
group problem relies on QRACM [72].
In this
application, the QRACM table is only read once
by the quantum computer. Hence, it is asymp-
totically irrelevant whether access costs Ω(N) for
the quantum computer or less, since the classical
controller has an Ω(N) cost to construct the ta-
ble.
For cryptographic applications, the size of each
QRACM access ranges from about 218 bits to 251,
depending on the parameters [23, 34, 92]. The
robustness to noise is unknown.
Exponential Quantum Cryptanalysis.
Al-
gorithms with exponential run-time or space
requirements are used in the security analysis
for cryptography intended to be quantum-safe.
Specifically, QRACM is needed in algorithms in
collision finding [25] and lattice sieving [2, 61,
73, 74], and QRAQM is necessary for attacks
based on quantum random walks, such as claw-
finding [107], information set decoding [66, 70],
subset-sum [18], and other lattice sieving meth-
ods [24, 33]. As NIST selected lattice cryptogra-
phy for standardization in 2022 [84], lattice siev-
ing is critical.
For the asymptotically “fastest” quantum lat-
tice sieving against the smallest proposed pa-
rameters of the post-quantum schemes to be
standardized [24], the QRACM needs 249 bits.
Against mid-scale parameters one needs 278 bits.
For collision search against the ubiquitous hash
function SHA-256, one needs 293 bits of QRACM.
In addition to the hefty memory requirements,
the accuracy of the memory must be extraordi-
narily high. [98] and [5] show that Grover’s algo-
rithm needs exponentially small QRAQM error,
but one can also see that most of these cryptog-
raphy attacks require finding a single element of
the memory. If that element is destroyed because
of noise, the algorithm fails.
This is the most extreme application of QRAM
with the most stringent requirements on the de-
vice. We will refer to these algorithms somewhat
imprecisely as database QAA, to indicate that we
are using QAA (quantum amplitude amplifica-
tion) [26], or a quantum random walk, to search
over some classical database.
Context
There may be a disconnect in the dis-
course around the feasibility of QRAM. Propo-
nents and hardware designers may only be con-
sidering small-scale regimes of up to 230 bits of
QRAM, in which case the arguments presented
here and elsewhere may be surmountable: classi-
cal computational components in 2004 had error
rates of 2−30 to 2−40 [108], so perhaps quantum
components could reach the same level.
However, at the scale of e.g.
220 bits, our
conclusions are also less relevant; we know (Sec-
tion 5) how to perform N-bit QRAM with a cir-
cuit of O(N) gates, so any algorithm using 2n bits
of QRAM will face only a 2n overhead if physical
QRAM assumptions are wrong. For something
like 220 bits, this does not make a large differ-
ence, especially considering the extreme uncer-
tainties in future quantum computing overheads
and architectures.
In contrast, at the scale of 250 bits, cheap pas-
sive QRAM causes a drastic change in algorithm
costs, which has incentivized the research into
algorithms that use QRAM. Yet, even minute
physical costs become relevent if they scale with
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
memory size. For perspective, if we lose a single
visible photon’s worth of energy for every bit in
memory for each access, accessing 250 bits costs
about 1 kJ.
As we move into cryptographic scales, QRAM
becomes clearly absurd. A single photon’s worth
of energy per bit means 1 giga-Joule per ac-
cess if we have 280 bits.
Even more extreme:
in a Fabry-Perot interforometer, the momentum
change from a single microwave photon on a 10 g
mirror would shift the mirror’s position by a por-
tion of 2−98 of the cavity’s length. If the memory
needs 2−128 precision (as one proposed QRAM
technology, see Section 10.3), then this shift is a
billion times larger than the precision needed.
Most of our conclusions in this paper sug-
gest that an N-bit QRAM access will need en-
ergy/computation/some other cost to scale as
Ω(N) (i.e., be active), and/or each physical com-
ponent will need error rates of O(1/N). These are
asymptotic claims, and it’s beyond what we can
say today to claim that at at small-scale memory
sizes, these terms will dominate other more rele-
vant costs. However, at machine learning scales
and beyond, we must consider these factors.
4
Case Study: Quantum Linear Alge-
bra
Certain statistical and/or machine learning prob-
lems can be framed as linear algebra, where we
transform some vectors by matrices. Quantum
linear algebra aims to accelerate these transfor-
mations; however, if the input data are large
databases, this requires QRAM. The following
references provide an overview of some of the
techniques used in, and applications of, quan-
tum machine learning, in some cases discussing
their assumptions regarding the necessity of
QRAM [21, 49, 77, 95].
Moreover, the follow-
ing references provide an overview of, and de-
tail important techniques in, quantum linear al-
gebra with some discussing the creation of the
QRAM data-structures relevant for linear alge-
bra [49, 60, 69, 76, 78, 80, 97].
We now detail our input model and formally
define the general linear algebra task we con-
sider. We then discuss the necessity of QRAM
(i.e.
for “unstructured” input data), and eval-
uate the opportunity cost of QRAM by giving
algorithms for the classical co-processors to solve
the defined linear algebra problem. We conclude
that without passive hardware-QRAM, quantum
linear algebra algorithms provide no asymptotic
advantage, unless we are at a scale large enough
that the classical co-processors cannot share ac-
cess to the same memory, but small enough that
signal latency is negligible.
Ref [1] made these opportunity cost arguments
for matrix inversion, [103] applied them to an ap-
proach to “Quantum PageRank”, and [39] briefly
notes that these arguments generalize. This sec-
tion expands and generalizes these ideas, incor-
porating questions of physical layout.
4.1
Input Model and Matrix Functions
Formally, we assume we are given some matrix
H ∈CN×N such that H = H†, via query access
to the elements of H, and some vector v ∈CN
again via query access to its elements. The query
access is provided via oracles which return the
output associated with any given input. For ex-
ample, the oracle for matrix H may be given by
OH |x⟩|y⟩|0⟩= |x⟩|y⟩|Hxy⟩.
(6)
In the case where H is sparse (i.e.
H has at
most d non-zero elements in any given row or
column), we also assume we are given another
oracle specifying the locations of the non-zero el-
ements. Moreover, we restrict our attention to
the case where the matrix under consideration
is both square and Hermitian, noting that non-
square and non-Hermitian matrices ˜H can be em-
bedded into a Hermitian matrix H :=
 
0
˜H
˜H†
0
!
,
as is commonly done in the literature [60].
In
this embedding, the eigenvalues of H are directly
related to the ± singular values of ˜H, and its
eigenvectors are a simple function of the right
and left singular vectors of H. Finally, we define
a function f of a Hermitian matrix H as a func-
tion of its eigenvalues, i.e. when H |λi⟩= λi |λi⟩,
f(H) := P
j f(λj)|λj⟩⟨λj|. This differs slightly
from some definitions, which define the function
on the singular values. We restrict our attention
to general set of linear algebra problems which
are equivalent to computing the vector f(H)v.
We further restrict f to be a degree-k polyno-
mial, with small loss of generality since polyno-
mials can approximate most functions of interest
on the domain [−1, 1]. We give the formal prob-
lem statement in Problem 1.
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
Problem 1 (Polynomial Eigenvalue Transform
Problem). Given a polynomial function f
:
[−1, 1] 7→C of degree at most k, such that
∀x, |f(x)| ≤1, an N × 1 initial vector v and a d-
sparse, N × N, Hermitian matrix H, specified by
an oracle OH (and an additional location-oracle
in the case that d ∈o(N)), such that ∥H∥2 ≤1,
compute f(H)v/ ∥f(H)v∥2.
Many quantum linear algebra tasks can be cast
in the framework of Problem 1, such as matrix
inversion, Gibbs sampling, power iteration, and
Hamiltonian simulation [80]. In essence we are
describing the Quantum Singular Value Trans-
form (QSVT) framework [49], which can be seen
as a unifying framework for nearly all quantum
algorithms as summarized in [80]. The QSVT is
defined on the singular values rather than the
eigenvalues, but in the case of Hermitian ma-
trices, the singular values are just the absolute
eigenvalues, and so the problems are practically
equivalent (with some additional tedium).
Of course, QRAM is not always necessary to
offer query access to H or v.
In some cases,
there exist circuits with polylog(N) depth which
can implement the mappings, such as in [20, 96,
110, 115]. With entries that are not efficiently
computable, an oracle to H needs QRAM access
to the Nd non-zero entries of H.
We assume
a “wide” QRAM such as a bucket-brigade or
fanout-and-swap, which need Nd quantum reg-
isters but provide O(log(Nd)) circuit-depth per
access. Our analysis holds if the QRAM is im-
plemented with fewer quantum registers but with
longer access times, as that benefits the classical
co-processors in our comparison.
4.2
Dequantization
Tang [106] first introduced dequantization prov-
ing that the quantum algorithm for recommenda-
tion systems of Kerenidis and Prakash [69] does
not have exponential quantum advantage over a
randomized classical algorithm making a simi-
lar input assumption.
The argument starts by
noting that the Nd non-zero elements of the in-
put matrix must be stored somewhere (e.g., by
preparing a QRAM gate or data structure), and
this creates a Ω(dN) set-up cost. For example,
the nodes of a bucket-brigade QRAM must be
initialized with the appropriate data.
A similar amount of classical precomputation
can create a data structure that allows efficient
ℓ2-norm sampling from all columns of the in-
put matrix.
Even if data is added in an on-
line setting to the quantum memory (amortiz-
ing the cost), with similar cost a classical data
structure can also be maintained with online up-
dates. Combined with a large body of classical
randomized numerical linear algebra techniques
(e.g. [36, 68]), one can obtain classical algorithms
for Problem 1 with polylogarithmic dependence
on the dimensions of the input.
Dequantization has some limitations.
Most
approaches require either the matrix to be low-
rank [11, 48, 106], or with some caveats, for the
matrix to be sparse and the polynomial function
being applied to have at most a constant de-
gree [11]. If any classical algorithm could imple-
ment matrix inversion on sparse matrices (which
is a special case of QSVT) with a polynomial de-
pendence on the condition number (i.e., without
a meaningful rank constraint), then since matrix
inversion was shown to be BQP-complete [60],
such a classical algorithm could efficiently sim-
ulate any polynomial time quantum algorithm.
This would obviously be an extremely surpris-
ing result, and so we cannot expect a classi-
cal dequantized QSVT-styled algorithm to have
rank-independence, in general.
Moreover, de-
quantization also leaves room for some polyno-
mial quantum advantage, with QSVT requiring
O(k) QRAM queries for a degree-k polynomial,
compared to an O(k9) cost for leading classi-
cal techniques [11]. In general, see Figure 1 of
[37] to compare complexities of dequantization.
New classical techniques could close these gaps,
but currently there are many algorithms with at
least a quartic speed-up over their dequantized
counterparts, so if cheap QRAM existed, even
early fault-tolerant devices might see an advan-
tage [10].
Critically,
dequantization
arguments
allow
cheap access to the QRAM, and only consider
the opportunity cost of the quantum algorithm’s
input assumptions (e.g.
the cost to construct
the QRAM data structure). Instead we focus on
the access cost.
If the QRAM requires classi-
cal control or co-processing (e.g. laser pulses en-
acting the gates, or classical resources dedicated
to error-correction), these polynomial quantum
advantages over their dequantized counterparts
vanish (and indeed the quantum algorithms
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
would potentially even be exponentially slower
than their dequantized counterparts) – such ar-
guments even apply for some algorithms that
cannot be dequantized.
4.3
QRAM versus Parallel Classical Computa-
tion
In this section we discuss the possibility of a gen-
eral asymptotic quantum speedup in Problem 1,
by considering the opportunity cost of the clas-
sical control for the QRAM. We assumed the
QRAM has O(Nd) logical qubits. With active
error correction for each qubit, syndrome mea-
surements and corrections will require substan-
tial classical co-processing, with O(1) classical
processors per logical qubit. We assume each of
these processors has constant-sized local mem-
ory with fast and efficient access. It seems un-
likely that any error-corrected QRAM architec-
ture could use asymptotically fewer classical re-
sources.
Even without error correction, only passive
hardware-QRAM avoids costs proportional to
Nd.
Advances in quantum computing could
drive the constant of proportionality to be
smaller, but asymptotically the arguments in this
section will still hold, short of a significant break-
through in the manufacturing of passive QRAM
(see Section 6 for a comparison of active vs. pas-
sive QRAM).
We then further consider some frequently ne-
glected constraints on large scale parallel com-
puting, such as signal latency, connectivity, and
wire length, which gives us three regimes of scale.
The regime that considers total wire length but
neglects the speed of light is probably the least
realistic regime that we consider, and we sus-
pect that the number of connections between pro-
cessors/memory is more relevant than the total
length of wires.
Nevertheless, we include this
regime as it is the only one we found which led
to potential quantum advantage.
To start the comparison, we give a lower-bound
on the number of QRAM accesses that any quan-
tum algorithm will need to solve Problem 1,
then show a classical algorithm that solves the
problem with the same number of matrix-vector
multiplications.
We can then compare parallel
classical matrix-vector multiplication to a single
QRAM access.
Theorem 4.1 (Quantum Polynomial Eigenvalue
Transform). Given a degree k polynomial on the
interval x ∈[−1, 1], with f(x) = Pk
j=0 ajxj,
a d-sparse Hermitian matrix H ∈CN×N and
an ℓ2-normalized vector |ψ⟩∈CN, no gen-
eral quantum algorithm can prepare the state
f(H) |ψ⟩/ ∥f(H) |ψ⟩∥2 with asymptotically fewer
than Ω(k) QRAM queries to H, each query with
cost T.
This follows immediately from Theorem A.1.
The result of [49] almost immediately implies this
bound, but the following derivation is included to
enhance the clarity of our discussion.
The main idea is that we can efficiently con-
struct a block-encoding (a method to encode non-
unitary matrices as the top-left block of a uni-
tary) of a rank one projector from a uniform su-
perposition to the marked state of an unstruc-
tured search problem (specified via an oracle)
with a singular value equal to
1
√
N (where N is
the dimension of the space). We can do this with
only O(1) queries to the unstructured search ora-
cle; however, immediately applying the block en-
coding to an initial state has a low probability
of success. We thus embed this in a rank-2 Her-
mitian matrix and apply a polynomial approxi-
mation to the sign function on the eigenvalues of
this Hermitian matrix. The degree of this poly-
nomial is ˜O(
√
N), and it gives a constant prob-
ability of success in measuring a solution to the
unstructured search problem.
Consequently, if
we could implement this polynomial with o(
√
N)
queries, we could solve the unstructured search
with less than Ω(
√
N) complexity. Since unstruc-
tured search has an Ω(
√
N) lower bound, this
creates a lower bound of Ω(k) for any general
quantum algorithm implementing an eigenvalue
transform of a degree-k polynomial.
Theorem 4.2 (Classical Parallel Polynomial
Eigenvalue Transform). Given a degree k poly-
nomial on the interval x ∈[−1, 1], with f(x) =
Pk
j=0 ajxj, a d-sparse Hermitian matrix H ∈
CN×N, and an ℓ2-normalized vector v ∈CN, a
parallel classical algorithm can exactly compute
the vector f(H)v/ ∥f(H)v∥2 with O(k) matrix-
vector multiplications and k vector-vector addi-
tions.
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
Scale
Assumptions
Quantum advantage
Free wires
Instant communication
Sparse Matrices
Dense Matrices
Small
Yes
Yes
None
None
Medium
No
Yes
˜O((Nd)1/2)
None
Large
No
No
None
None
Table 1: Comparing classical versus quantum algorithms for Problem 1 for N × N matrices, under different architec-
tural assumptions with active QRAM. It may appear strange that the potential quantum speedup in the Medium-Scale
regime increases as d increases, and then suddenly vanishes when d ∈Ω(N). We suspect that a classical algorithm
for the medium-scale regime for sparse matrices with d ≫1 could be improved.
Proof. By definition,
f(H) =
N−1
X
j=0
k
X
l=0
alλl
j|λj⟩⟨λj|.
(7)
Applying the completeness of the eigenvectors
of H, we immediately get f(H) = Pk
j=0 ajHj.
This means we must simply compute f(H)v =
Pk
j=0 ajHjv. This can be done with k matrix-
vector multiplications by computing the powers
H1v, H2v,. . . ,Hkv, and adding ajHjv to a run-
ning total vector after each multiplication. We
do not need to store all the powers Hjv, since we
can delete each one once we add it to the total
and compute the next power of H. Once the un-
normalised vector f(H)v has been constructed,
we can normalize it by computing the ℓ2 norm
(which requires O(N) parallelizable operations,
and O(log N) joining steps), and then by div-
ing each element in the output vector by this
norm, which requires a further O(N/P) steps.
We assume that the cost of matrix-vector multi-
plications dominates the cost of this normaliza-
tion.
From now on we ignore the cost of vector-
vector additions (which parallelize perfectly),
since they are likely negligible compared to
matrix-vector multiplications.
Thus, our com-
parison comes down to to the expense of matrix-
vector multiplication.
In our computational
model, the QRAM with Nd registers implies a
proportional number of classical processors, so we
now consider highly parallel matrix-vector multi-
plication at different scales. Table 1 summarizes
our conclusions.
Small-Scale Regime:
At this scale we ig-
nore all latency and connectivity concerns. The
QRAM access can then be done in Θ(log(Nd))
time (i.e., circuit depth). We assume the classi-
cal processors can access a shared memory of size
Nd, also with O(log(Nd)) access time.
A standard parallel matrix multiplication al-
gorithm (see Theorem A.2) allows the the P =
Θ(dN) processors to multiply the matrix and
vector in ˜O(1) time, matching the assumed time
of the QRAM access.
Together with Theo-
rem 4.1 and Theorem 4.2, the classical algorithms
achieves ˜O(k) scaling, while the quantum algo-
rithm achieves a ˜Ω(k) lower-bound for the general
linear algebra task, so there can be no asymptotic
quantum advantage at this scale.
Medium-Scale Regime:
With a large ma-
trix, shared memory access is unrealistic. One
problem is that it requires Ω((Nd)2) wires to
connect each processor to each memory element.
The QRAM does not need so many wires; a
bucket-brigade QRAM needs only O(Nd) wires,
for example.
Thus, in this regime we only allow each pro-
cessor to have a small number of wires (and
count the total length of wires).
Connecting
the processors to each other and restricting ac-
cess to local memory requires different algo-
rithms. Theorem A.3 shows how to multiply a
sparse matrix and vector using O(1) sorts. With
O(log(Nd)) connections per processor (and thus
˜O(Nd) wires), the processors can form a hyper-
cube and sort in polylogarithmic time. In this
case, the time for QRAM access and classical
matrix-vector multiplication match, again negat-
ing any quantum advantage.
However, we should also consider the length of
the wires. By “wire” we mean any communica-
tion infrastructure, under the assumptions that
(a) two connections cost twice as much as one
connection, and (b) a connection which is twice
as long will cost twice as much. This means the
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
architecture needs more resources to have longer
connections. A real architecture must embed into
the 3-dimensional Euclidean space we live in, and
we further assume it embeds into 2-dimensional
space to account for heat dissipation. Each clas-
sical processor has a finite size, so the total width
of this machine must be Ω((Nd)1/2). This means
the length of wires in this hypercube scales to
˜Ω((Nd)3/2), which is also infeasible.
The total width of the QRAM must also
be Ω((Nd)1/2) by the same reasoning, but the
QRAM need only have O(Nd) total wire length
if it is well-designed (e.g., an H-tree).
To use O(Nd) wires classically, we will as-
sume the classical processors are in a two-
dimensional mesh with nearest-neighbour con-
nectivity.
In this case a sort takes time
O((Nd)1/2), so the time for matrix-vector mul-
tiplication is ˜O((Nd)1/2), compared to ˜O(1) for
QRAM access. Thus, we have a square-root time
advantage for the QRAM in this case.
This only applies to sparse matrices, however.
If the matrix is dense, the QRAM implies Ω(N2)
classical co-processors, which can multiply the
matrix by a vector in time O(log(N)), as we show
in Theorem A.4. This means the quantum advan-
tage can only potentially apply to sparse matri-
ces.
Strangely the quantum advantage increases
with d until vanishing when d = Ω(N). Likely
this is because the classical hardware budget in-
creases with the QRAM size, which increases
with d, and we have not considered optimized
classical algorithms for large d. The sparse case
is harder for the classical machine because the
memory access for small d could be random, cre-
ating a large routing problem to send data from
arbitrary memory cells to each processor.
Large-Scale Regime:
At large enough scales,
we must account for the time for signals to prop-
agate through the computers, even at lightspeed.
This does not change the asymptotic time for
the 2-dimensional mesh, which only has short lo-
cal connections. The QRAM must have a width
of Ω((Nd)1/2), so each QRAM access now takes
time Ω((Nd)1/2). Thus, the classical and quan-
tum algorithms for Problem 1 both take time
˜Θ(k(Nd)1/2), and the asymptotic quantum ad-
vantage disappears.
Which regime is realistic? The scale of QRAM
necessary for these algorithms would depend on
the application, but for context, Google’s “IMA-
GEN”, a text-to-image diffusion model, used 243
bits of data for its training set [99].
The small-scale regime might hold up to Nd ≈
229, as [14] ignore memory connectivity and com-
pute sparse matrix-vector multiplication at that
size in 0.03 s with a single CPU and GPU. Larger
problems will certainly face bandwidth issues,
moving us to at least the medium-scale regime.
The large-scale regime might seem far-fetched,
where lightspeed signal propagation is the lim-
iting factor, but consider that light would take
173 clock cycles to travel across the Frontier su-
percomputer, which has “only” 256 bits of mem-
ory [38]. Frontier also has enough wire that any
two nodes are at most 3 hops away [38].
Further, we might be somewhere in between.
We can divide a matrix into a block matrix, and
use small-scale techniques for the blocks them-
selves and a larger-scale algorithm for the full
matrix.
In practice, Google’s TPUs are 2-dimensional
grids of processors with only nearest-neighbour
connectivity, optimized for dense matrix multi-
plication [54]. Instead of the techniques we de-
scribe, they use a “systolic” method to multiply
an N × N matrix that takes time proportional
to N with N2 processors. Their architecture is
optimized for throughput, as it can simultane-
ously multiply the same matrix by many vectors.
The throughput asymptotically approaches O(1)
cycles per matrix-vector multiplication, the best
one can do with N2 processors.
Overall, this becomes a battle of constant fac-
tors. The quantum advantage for sparse matrix
linear algebra in the medium-scale regime de-
pends on the constant factor overheads of quan-
tum computing being less important than the
constant factor of signal latency.
4.4
Quantum
Linear
Algebra
with
Noisy
QRAM
The opportunity cost arguments made in the
last section apply for any active QRAM system,
but they are strongest for error-corrected archi-
tectures (which require significant classical co-
processing). In contrast, passive QRAM systems
(potentially such as certain implementations of
bucket-brigade) suffer no such opportunity cost,
as once the QRAM query is initiated, the sys-
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
tem requires no further energy input or interven-
tion (although they will necessarily be noisy). As
such, if sufficient progress can be made in the con-
struction of a passive QRAM system (despite the
challenges we identify in Section 6), then for cer-
tain linear algebra algorithms that can tolerate
some noise in their QRAM queries, it is possi-
ble that practically relevant quantum advantage
could be realized.
For example, with the bucket brigade archi-
tecture, the overall probability of an error per
query to a QRAM with N memory cells scales
as ∼p log(N)2, where p is the physical proba-
bility of an error (see Section 9.4,[59]). This im-
mediately rules out an asymptotic advantage for
any quantum algorithm asymptotically improv-
ing error-rate dependence (for arbitrarily small
errors), but may be practically useful in cases
where either the overall algorithm is relatively
insensitive to QRAM access errors, or if the phys-
ical error rate can be made to approach the nec-
essary precision without error correction or ex-
ternal intervention.
In some linear algebra tasks, a small constant
error per QRAM access may be fine.
For in-
stance, in some machine learning applications the
underlying data is already noisy, so additional
noise may be acceptable.
In other cases, such
as the training and deployment of large language
models (LLMs), it has been demonstrated that
models can still function with reasonable accu-
racy when the weights are quantized down to 16-
bits [67], 8-bits [41], or even down to 2-bits [44].
Clearly a two-bit quantization introduces sub-
stantial noise in the evaluation of a model, and if
LLMs can still function in this regime, it is pos-
sible they could be similarly resilient to noise in
a QRAM query to their parameters.
Moreover,
in reinforcement learning,
addi-
tional noise could assist an agent to explore its
environment, rather than just exploit its existing
policy [105].
For matrix inversion with a structured matrix
(i.e. a matrix not stored in QRAM) on an in-
put vector constructed from QRAM, for well-
conditioned matrices the output of the matrix in-
version is relatively insensitive to small perturba-
tions in the input vector. For matrices in QRAM,
for some classes of matrices the inversion could
be insensitive to perturbations in the structure of
the matrix itself [42].
We recommend further exploration into error-
corrected quantum linear algebra algorithms us-
ing noisy QRAM systems. We do not rule out
the possibility of practical quantum advantage
in such cases. Of course, at some scale the un-
corrected noise will overwhelm nearly any algo-
rithm, but with sufficient noise resilience (in both
e.g. the bucket-brigade QRAM and in the algo-
rithm itself), at realistic scales such quantum al-
gorithms could still be of significant commercial
and scientific value.
5
Circuit QRAM
Here we highlight four approaches to circuit
QRAM and give brief descriptions of each. For
the full details, follow the references. All of these
approaches have overall costs of ˜Θ(N) gates to
access N bits of memory, even with logarithmic
circuit depth. This may feel unreasonably high;
however, in a bounded fan-in circuit model, this
is essentially optimal.
As Section 3 shows, there are many applica-
tions where QRAM is a useful tool, even with
this high cost. Circuit QRAM is a valuable tool
in quantum algorithm analysis.
5.1
Lower Bounds
The key point of these lower bounds is that with
N bits of memory in a QRACM, there are 2N
possible QRACM gates, depending on the values
in those bits. However, the number of different
quantum circuits is roughly exponential in the
product of the number of qubits and the circuit
depth, which one can see because we have a finite
set of choices of gate for each qubit at each time
step. Thus, we need N ≈depth×width. This is
analogous to a classic result of Shannon about
classical circuits [102].
More precisely, we prove the following Lemma
in the appendix:
Lemma 5.1. The set of all distinct quantum cir-
cuits on W qubits of depth D using G gates from
a fixed set of g possible gates of fanin at most k,
has size at most 2γG, where γ = k · lg(DWg
G
√
k ).
Intuitively,
one can obtain a simple non-
rigorous version of the above result with the fol-
lowing argument. Suppose we have a circuit with
G gates, and that the gate set contains M = 2m
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
possibilities, including the identity. Then, there
are MG = 2mG possible circuits. The above argu-
ment makes this notion rigorous and general, e.g.,
covering cases where some gates may be multi-
qubit controlled gates.
We will prove the lower bound even for approx-
imations of QRACM, which we define as follows:
Given a table T with N rows, let UQRACM(T) be
the QRACM circuit implementing T. A circuit
C ϵ-approximately implements a UQRACM(T) if
∥C −UQRACM(T)∥2 ≤ϵ.
Theorem 5.2. Let 0 ≤ϵ ≤1/
√
2. Let 0 < τ ≤1
be the fraction of possible QRACM tables that
circuits with at most G gates from the gate set
in Theorem 5.1 is able to ϵ-approximately imple-
ment. Moreover, define γ as per Theorem 5.1.
Then,
1. A given circuit C can ϵ-approximate at most
1 QRACM table.
2. The number of gates G to ϵ-approximately
implement
a
fraction
τ
of
all
possible
QRACM tables is lower-bounded by G ≥
log τ+N
γ
. That is, G ∈˜Ω(N + log τ).
3. To approximately implement all possible
QRACM tables with circuits using at most
G gates, N ∈˜O(G), and equivalently, G ∈
˜Ω(N).
Proof. We are given two N-row QRAM tables T
and T ′, enacted by the unitaries U(T) and U(T ′)
respectively. Assume that the tables differ at in-
dex j, i.e., T[j] ̸= T ′[j]. Then,
(U(T) −U(T ′)) |j⟩n |0⟩1
 =
√
2.
(8)
Consequently, ∥U(T) −U(T ′)∥2 ≥
√
2.
Now suppose that a given unitary circuit
C ϵ-approximates both U(T) and U(T ′), i.e.,
∥U(T) −C∥2 ≤ϵ and ∥U(T ′) −C∥2 ≤ϵ. Then,
√
2 ≤
U(T) −C + C −U(T ′)

2 ≤2ϵ.
(9)
Thus, 1/
√
2 ≤ϵ.
Thus, it is not possible for
one circuit to approximate more than one QRAM
table, unless ϵ > 1/
√
2.
Importantly, allow-
ing tables to be approximated to a con-
stant error does not provide any meaning-
ful asymptotic advantage.
Using the gate set defined in Theorem 5.1,
Theorem 5.1 shows that there are 2kG(lg( DW g
G
√
k ))
possible circuits using G gates. Assuming that
ϵ ≤1/
√
2, each distinct circuit can only ap-
proximate at most a single QRAM table.
Let
γ := k(lg(DWg
G
√
k )). Consequently, a set of 2γG dis-
tinct circuits can approximate at most 2γG dis-
tinct QRAM tables.
Noting that there are 2N possible QRAM ta-
bles with N rows, the fraction of ϵ-approximable
tables with at most G gates is bounded by 2γG
2N =
2γG−N. Let 0 < τ ≤1 represent the fraction of
QRAM tables that circuits with G gates are able
to approximate. Then,
τ ≤2γG−N =⇒log τ + N
γ
≤G.
(10)
Thus, for circuits with G gates to be able to
implement a τ fraction of all possible N row
QRAMs, G ∈˜Ω(N + log τ).
We will now briefly outline some special cases
of this result, to help build intuition. If we wish
to:
• Cover all possible tables, then τ = 1, so G ∈
˜Ω(N).
• Cover a constant fraction of possible tables
then τ ∈Θ(1), so G ∈˜Ω(N). E.g., if we wish
to cover exactly half of all possible QRAM
tables, τ = 1/2, so N−1
γ
≤G. If we wish to
cover a quarter of all possible tables, N−2
γ
≤
G, etc.
• Cover an exponentially small fraction of ta-
bles, e.g., τ ∈Θ(2−N), so G ∈˜Ω(1). Let
c > 0 be some constant such that τ = c2−N.
Then, we find log2(c)/γ ≤G.
This demonstrates how this result generally ap-
plies, even in cases where QRACM circuits can be
efficiently constructed, as such efficient QRACM
circuits belong to the exponentially small frac-
tion of circuits where the gate-complexity lower-
bound is efficient.
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
|addr⟩
|ψin⟩
|0⟩
|ψout⟩
|addr⟩
|0⟩
⊕
?
=0
⊕
?
=0
⊕T[0]
⊕
?
=1
⊕
?
=1
⊕T[1]
⊕
?
=2
⊕
?
=2
⊕T[2]
⊕
?
=3
⊕
?
=3
⊕T[3]
⊕
?
=4
⊕
?
=4
⊕T[4]
Figure 2: Circuit diagram for naive QRACM. Here
?
=j means a circuit that checks if the input equals j, and flips the
target output if so.
Algorithm 1 Simple implementation of a naive
QRACM access.
1: Input: A qubit address register, an output
qubit, and a classical table T of N bits
2: for i = 0 to N do
3:
if Ti = 0 then
4:
Do nothing
5:
else
6:
Apply a circuit to check if the address
register equals i and write the result to
an ancilla |b⟩
7:
Apply a CNOT from |b⟩to the output
qubit
8:
Uncompute |b⟩
9:
end if
10: end for
Notably, the lower bound applies to circuits,
meaning measurements are forbidden.
With
feedback from measurements, our simple count-
ing arguments fall apart quickly: consider the set
of operations, each defined by a table of size N,
where one measures the entire input, classically
finds that address in the table, then applies an
X if the bit at that address is 1. It’s easy to see
that there are 2N distinct “operations” of this
type, but the number of quantum gates to imple-
ment each one is only lg(N) + 1. However, these
are not QRACM. To be useful, the measurements
need to be mostly independent of the input state,
but we leave it to future work to incorporate
this into the counting arguments. If the feedback
from measurements is simple enough to replace
it with quantum control without drastically in-
creasing the resource requirements, the bounds
will hold.
[112] provide a similar lower bound
through different techniques which are also re-
stricted to measurement-free circuits.
This lower bound implies that variational ap-
proaches to QRAM ([87, 93]) cannot scale better
than other circuits. We can discretize the contin-
uous parameters to get a finite gate set, which in-
creases the parameter g in Theorem 5.1, but does
control
addr0
addr1:n
|ψin⟩
n−1
•
•
•
UQRACM(T0)
•
⊕
UQRACM(T1)
•
•
Figure 3: Recursive controlled unary QRACM from [8].
not appreciably change the asymptotics until the
precision of the parameters becomes exponentia-
tion in N, the table size. Such precision seems
absurd: if the duration of a laser pulse were spec-
ified to such a high precision, it would take ≈N
bits just to transmit the duration of the pulse to
the laser!
5.2
Unary Encoding
In a QRACM access, the memory is entirely clas-
sical, so the control program can access all of it.
The control program can dynamically construct a
circuit to represent a particular memory. A naive
strategy is to “check-and-write” for each address,
as in Algorithm 1/Figure 2:
The cost is O(N lg N) gates and the depth
can be as low as O(N lg lg N) if we use auxil-
iary qubits for the address comparison. This is
already nearly optimal.
[90] present approximately this version, while
the optimized version of [8] use an efficient recur-
sive structure of controlled QRACM. The base
case, a one-element controlled look-up, is just
a CNOT. For the recursive case, see Figure 3,
where Tb is a table of size N/2 defined from a ta-
ble T by taking all elements whose address starts
with the bit b ∈{0, 1}. This uses lg N ancilla
qubits and a low-T AND gate to give a T-count
of 4N −8, with a total gate cost of O(N).
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
Attractive features of this circuit are its low
qubit count and its simplicity.
Even better, if
the table has multi-bit words, then the base case
– a controlled look-up in a one-element table –
is just a multi-target CNOT gate. This has con-
stant depth with only Clifford gates and measure-
ments, so the overall costs for an m-bit table are
O(Nm) gates in depth O(N).
5.3
Bucket-Brigade
Bucket-brigade QRAM [52] was a groundbreak-
ing approach to QRAM that laid the basis for
almost all hardware-QRAM since.
It is not
often considered in the circuit model (though
see [59, 81, 89]).
The core idea is a binary tree, and we imagine
“sending in” address bits. At each node in the
tree, the first bit to reach that node sets the state
of the node to either “left” or “right”, depending
on the whether the bit was 0 or 1. Any subse-
quent bit reaching that node is directed either
left or right, accordingly.
In the circuit model, we copy the description
of [59], shown in Figure 4.
Each node of the
routing tree has two qubits: a routing qubit |ri⟩
and a control qubit |ci⟩, all of which are initialized
to |0⟩.
To perform a memory access, we start by swap-
ping the top (most significant) bit of the address
into the control qubit at the root node of the tree.
We then swap the second-highest address bit into
the routing qubit at the root node, then apply the
routing circuit shown in Figure 4d. This swaps
the routing qubit (which now contains the state
of the second-highest address qubit) into the con-
trol qubit of either the left or right node in the
next level, depending on the state of the control
qubit of the root node.
We then repeat this process: we swap the ith
address bit into the routing qubit at the root,
then apply the routing circuit to all nodes at the
0th level, then the 1st level, up level i −1. Then,
at the ith level, we apply the control circuit in
Figure 4c. This puts the address qubit into the
control, so it can properly route the next address
qubit.
At this point, there are many possible ap-
proaches to read the actual data. For QRACM,
one could use X gates to the ith leaf of the table
if T[i] = 1. We then apply the routing circuit
to all nodes in each layer, but iterating from the
(b)
(a) Tree of nodes for memory access
|r1⟩, |c1⟩
|r2⟩, |c2⟩
|r3⟩, |c3⟩
(b) Three nodes in the tree
|c1⟩
|r1⟩
|c2⟩
|r2⟩
|c3⟩
|r3⟩
×
×
×
×
(c) Control circuit.
|c1⟩
|r1⟩
|c2⟩
|r2⟩
|c3⟩
|r3⟩
×
×
×
×
(d) Routing circuit.
Figure 4: Schematic of the overall tree structure of cir-
cuit bucket-brigade QRACM. In the tree structure in (a),
the lines between nodes are only to help exposition and
do not represent any physical device (unlike in hardware
bucket-brigade QRACM; see Section 9). (b) shows how
each node consists of 2 qubits, and labels them to show
where the circuits in (c) and (d) apply their gates.
bottom layer to the top. This will swap the state
of the qubit at the desired address back to the
root of the tree, where we can copy it out with
a final CNOT. Then the entire circuit must be
uncomputed.
To create QRAQM, if we treat the table of
memory as the bottom layer of the tree, the same
SWAP technique as for QRACM will enact a
swap QRAQM.
Cost.
Both the control and routing circuits re-
quire 2 controlled-SWAPs at each node. For the
ith address bit, we must apply one of these cir-
cuits to every node from the root down to the ith
layer. The layered structure of gate applications
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
gives a total count of 2(n · 20 + (n −1)21 + (n −
2)22 + · · · + 2n) = O(N log N), where N = 2n.
Naively the depth is O(log2 N), since each ad-
dress bit requires looping over all previous layers.
However, as soon the ith address bit has been
routed into the 2nd level of the tree, address bit
i+1 can be swapped into the root and start that
layer. Thus, the depth is O(log N).
This circuit requires 2(N −1) ancilla qubits
just for the routing tree, and may require more
for the data itself, depending on how the the final
read is designed.
Overall, the costs are log-linear, but worse than
unary QRACM in constant factors.
While the
depth is only logarithmic in N (the best known),
there are many approaches to a log-depth circuit
QRAM [32, 34, 65].
Error scaling.
An advantage of the bucket-
brigade approach is the favourable error scal-
ing, proven in [59] and summarized in Sec-
tion 9.4.
Each node only needs errors below
O(1/polylog(N)), rather than O(1/N).
In a surface code architecture, this favourable
error scaling means we could reduce the code
distance for the qubits in the bucket-brigade
QRACM. This might noticeably decrease overall
depth, physical qubits, and perhaps allow easier
magic state distillation. Of course, it would need
to exceed the losses from the less efficient cir-
cuit design compared to (e.g.) a unary QRACM.
Further, it would only benefit applications where
the depth of the QRACM access is more impor-
tant the qubit count, since the bucket-brigade
and its error scaling depend on a fast, wide cir-
cuit.
Depth-limited cryptographic attacks are
an appealing candidate application. Quantifying
where this advantage lies is a fascinating question
for future work.
5.4
Select-Swap
[79] describe a technique that reduces T-count
even further, at the expense of more ancilla
qubits (which can be in an arbitrary state, how-
ever).
The technique appears also in [40] and
[19].
This method is analogous to “paging” in
classical memory. In most classical memory de-
vices, it is just as efficient to retrieve larger
chunks of memory (called “pages”) as it is to
retrieve single bits. Hence, the memory device
retrieves a page and a second device will extract
the specific word within that page. Analogously,
this QRACM circuit uses a QRACM circuit on
a larger page of the classical table, then uses a
QRAQM access on that page.
Recall that the T-gate cost of unary QRACM
(and depth) is independent of the length of each
word in the memory table.
From any table T
with N entries in {0, 1}, we can construct a table
T ′ with N/2ℓentries in {0, 1}ℓ, simply by group-
ing ℓconsecutive entries – a page – as one word
in T ′. Thus, to begin access to T, we start with a
unary QRACM access to T ′, writing the output
in an 2ℓ-bit auxiliary register. We do not need
the last ℓbits of the address to do this, since the
page we retrieve has every element that the last
ℓbits could address.
Once this is done, we want to extract the pre-
cise bit that the last ℓbits address. Since the
required page is already in the auxiliary register,
we use a QRAQM access to do this. The address
in the page for this QRAQM access is the last
ℓbits of the original address, and we write the
output to the original output register.
After this, we uncompute the QRAQM access
and uncompute the original unary QRACM ac-
cess.
To see why this works, notice that after the
first QRACM access, the 2ℓauxiliary bits are now
in a superposition, with the contents of these bits
entangled with the high bits of the address regis-
ter. Thus, a single QRAQM access extracts the
correct output for each of these states in super-
position.
|ψin⟩
|0⟩2ℓ
|addrL⟩
|addrH⟩
|addr⟩
ℓ/
n−ℓ/
⊕
UQRACM(T ′)
⊕
UQRAQM
(data)
UQRAQM
(address)
⊕
UQRACM(T ′)
Figure 5: Select-swap QRACM access. T ′ is the table
formed from T by combining each page of 2ℓconsecutive
bits of T into one word in T ′.
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
(A)
(B)
(C)
memory
address
output
|x0⟩
|x0⟩
×
×
|x1⟩
|x1⟩
×
×
|x2⟩
|x2⟩
×
×
|x3⟩
|x3⟩
×
×
|x4⟩
|x4⟩
×
×
|x5⟩
|x5⟩
×
×
|x6⟩
|x6⟩
×
×
|x7⟩
|x7⟩
×
×
|i0⟩
|i1⟩
|i2⟩
|ψin⟩
⊕
⊕
×
|0⟩
⊕
⊕
×
|0⟩
⊕
⊕
×
|0⟩
⊕
⊕
×
|0⟩
⊕
⊕
×
|0⟩
⊕
⊕
×
|0⟩
⊕
⊕
×
|0⟩
⊕
⊕
×
|0⟩
⊕
⊕
×
⊕
⊕
×
⊕
⊕
×
⊕
⊕
×
⊕
Figure 6: Fanout-and-swap QRAQM for N = 8. (A) uses a binary tree of swaps to move |xi⟩into the register
for |x0⟩, where (B) copies it out (replacing this CNOT with a SWAP would produce a SWAP-QRAQM). Then (C)
restores the memory register to its original state.
Cost.
The cost of the first unary QRACM ac-
cess is O(N/2ℓ) T-gates, in depth O(N/2ℓ) gen-
erally. For the second QRAQM acess, it needs
˜O(2ℓ) gates and has depth O(ℓ). To minimize T-
gates, a page size of 2ℓ≈
√
N gives a total T-cost
and depth of O(
√
N).
However, notice that the total gate cost is still
proportional to N, since writing each word of T ′
requires 2ℓCNOT gates. Thus, the majority of
the gates in this circuit are used for multi-fanout
CNOTs. If these are cheap, then this circuit is
cheap overall.
The qubit requirements for the T-gate-optimal
parameters are also proportional to
√
N. Using
other parameters, this approach provides a nice
extrapolation between bucket-brigade and unary
QRACM, able to reach almost any combination
of depth and width whose product is Θ(N). Even
better, this method can use dirty qubits (i.e.,
qubits which may hold data necessary for other
parts of the algorithm) for all but one word in
each page.
The circuit in the appendix of [19] achieves this
asymptotic cost, but they use a measurement-
based uncomputation in both the QRAQM and
QRACM access. This means they measure each
ancilla qubit in the {|+⟩, |−⟩} basis, giving a bi-
nary string v. If the ancilla qubits were in state
|b⟩for b ∈{0, 1}m, then that state acquires a
phase of −1 if and only if v · b has odd parity
(and extend this linearly).
They clean up this
phase with a second look-up. Since this phase is
a single bit, this is cheaper than a forward com-
putation when the words of T are larger than one
bit. For single-bit words they also reduce uncom-
putation costs by 1
2.
This
optimizes
the
non-asymptotic
gate
counts.
They use a QRAQM circuit based on
controlled swaps, rather than the bucket-brigade;
see Figure 6 for an analogous technique that
keeps depth and T-count small by using high-
fanout CNOT gates. The circuits in [19] achieve
the lowest T-count of any QRACM circuit to
date.
[65] provide a T-depth optimized method to
convert binary to unary encodings which could
likely be combined with [19].
[40] decompose
the SWAP gates to apply T-gates in parallel to
achieve a similarly low T-depth.
5.5
Parallel QRAM
Taking a step back to the algorithm calling
QRAM, many algorithms call the gate repeat-
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
19

--- PAGE 20 ---
edly and thus could benefit from parallelization.
We define such a gate as follows:
Definition 3. A parallel quantum random ac-
cess classical memory is a set of unitaries
UPQRACM(T), parameterized by a table T
∈
{0, 1}N, such that for any k address registes
|i1⟩. . . |ik⟩, with 1 ≤ij ≤N for all 1 ≤j ≤k,
UPQRACM |i1⟩|0⟩|i2⟩|0⟩. . . |ik⟩|0⟩
= |i1⟩|Ti1⟩|i2⟩|Ti2⟩. . . |ik⟩|Tik⟩.
(11)
We can define parallel QRAQM similarly, with
a shared external register |T0⟩. . . |TN−1⟩.
Clearly one can enact this by independently
applying QRAM to each address register, for a
total gate cost of O(kN). However, since the calls
share the same table, the cost can be reduced.
[13] solve this with sorting networks.
To briefly explain: they augment the table T to
a table T ′ by adding the address of each element
to that element, so each entry is (i, Ti, 1). Then
they augment the address registers to (ij, 0, 0)
and write this entire table into quantum mem-
ory. After this, they sort all of the memory reg-
isters and the address registers together, using
an ordering based on the first address register,
breaking ties with the final flag register (which is
1 for memory elements and 0 for query elements).
Sorting with this ordering ensures that the
quantum memory is laid out as
. . . |i, Ti, 1⟩|i + 1, Ti+1, 1⟩|i + 2, Ti+2, 1⟩|i + 2, 0, 0⟩. . .
(12)
where one can see that a query with address i+2
has been placed adjacent to the memory element
at address i+2, which the query needs to access.
From there, a careful series of controlled CNOTs
copies each memory element into any adjacent
queries. This takes some care: at this point the
control program does not know whether a given
register of qubits contains a memory element or
a query, so it must use a control made from the
last flag bit of both words as well as whether
they have the same address. Moreover, multiple
queries may access the same memory element, so
the copying must carefully cascade memory ele-
ments forwards whenever adjacent registers have
the same adders.
Once this is all done, they unsort the network.
Now the address registers have their requested
data. A quantum sort must keep a set of ancilla
qubits recording the outcome of the comparisons
of the sort, for reversibility, so these are used and
uncomputed to reverse the sort. In some sense,
the newly copied data just “follows” the rest of
the sort.
The cost of this scheme is primarily the cost
of the sorting network, which in turn is gov-
erned by the connectivity of the quantum com-
puter architecture.
[13] emphasize that with
a connectivity that they call the “hypercube”
(defined to mean that if we address each reg-
ister by a bitstring, each is connected to reg-
isters whose address differs in only one bit),
sorting N memory elements and k queries re-
quires only O((N + k) log(N + k)) gates and
depth O(polylog(N + k)). However, with a two-
dimensional nearest-neighbour architecture (e.g.,
a surface code with no flying qubits), it requires
O((N +k)3/2) gates and O((N +k)1/2) depth. It
remains debatable whether hypercube connectiv-
ity is feasible; we discuss this some in Section 8.4.
5.6
Data Structures
Classical computers use RAM to store and ac-
cess data in larger data structures such as linked
lists, hash tables, etc. Analogous quantum data
structures would inherently use QRAQM, such as
the quantum radix trees in [18]. However, with a
QRAQM access cost proportional to N in the cir-
cuit model, bespoke data structure circuits likely
exist.
As an example, [63, Section 4] performs inser-
tion into a sorted list by making N copies of an
input with a fanout gate, then simultaneously
comparing all elements of the list to a copy of
the input, then shifting all elements of the ar-
ray. This requires N comparisons, but no explicit
QRAQM access. [46] takes a similar approach to
build a quantum dictionary.
We encourage algorithms requiring quantum
data structures to use similar custom circuits to
operate on the data, rather than building them
from QRAQM accesses.
6
Hardware QRAM
Here we consider a specialized device for QRAM,
in the model of hardware-QRAM, that is not built
from general-purpose qubits.
The gate lower
bounds for circuit QRAM are unpalatable for cer-
tain applications, but there is no reason that all
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
20

--- PAGE 21 ---
parts of a future quantum computer are built as
circuits in a small gate set. Like GPUs or RAM
in classical computers today, it’s easy to imagine
specialized devices for specific tasks.
The goal
of hardware-QRAM is something much more ef-
ficient than implementing QRAM access as a cir-
cuit.
This section asks whether such a specialized
device can be built and run efficiently. Not all
tasks can have specialized hardware; it’s unrea-
sonable to expect a sub-module which solves 3-
SAT in quantum polynomial time. Our question
is whether QRAM access is a simpler problem.
To give a quick sense that QRACM is gener-
ally difficult, consider that if the table is T =
[0, 0, 0, 1], then QRACM access to this table
is equivalent to a Toffoli gate.
Hence, Clif-
ford+QRAM is a universal gate set.
In this section we lay out several issues that
any proposed QRAM device must address to be
competitive with circuit-based QRAM.
6.1
Active vs. Passive QRAM
Recall that in the memory peripheral model, we
cost quantum operations by the number of in-
terventions by the classical controller. Here we
extend that slightly to include the energy cost of
the external controller. For example, we would
count the cost to run a laser.
An active QRAM gate is one with cost in this
sense that is at least proportional to N for each
QRAM access. Active hardware-QRAM will still
fail asymptotically in the same way as active cir-
cuit QRAM. Recalling the scale of memory in
Section 3, even if the constant in this asymptotic
term is tiny, it quickly adds up when the memory
sizes are 250 bits or larger.
There may be a constant-factor advantage to
active hardware-QRAM, but Section 5 shows
that the constants for circuit QRAM are already
low. Moreover, when comparing a quantum al-
gorithm using QRAM to a classical algorithm
(such as with machine learning), the quantum
algorithm must overcome a great deal of over-
head to have advantage (e.g., Google’s quantum
team estimates that a quadratic advantage is in-
sufficient in the near term [9]; error correction
nearly eliminates the advantage of quantum lat-
tice sieving [3]). If QRAM has even a small linear
cost, algorithms like database HHL and database
QAA will only have – at best – a constant-factor
advantage over classical.
For these reasons, we discount any active
hardware-QRAM, though we cannot rule out a
constant-factor advantage from such a device.
Notice that passive QRAM (with o(N) cost for
each access) needs both the readout and routing
stages to be passive. Even if our readout is quite
low-energy – say, if we can read directly from
a non-volatile classical memory – if the routing
stage has cost Ω(N), the entire QRAM access
would have cost Ω(N).
6.2
Path Independence
Accessing memory in superposition means that
we must not destroy any of the states in super-
position, which means that no external system,
including the controller enacting the memory, can
learn anything about the memory access itself.
A major obstacle here is the path in which the
memory access travels.
In contrast, consider one aspect of classical
memory access that QRAM cannot emulate. If
there is a tree of routing nodes as in the bucket-
brigade QRAM, a classical computer can keep
all of the nodes in a low- or zero-power “idle”
mode, where a node activates only when it re-
ceives a signal from its parent node. Such a de-
vice would consume energy only in proportion to
O(log N), not O(N). QRAM cannot do this be-
cause in general it needs to be able to act on an
arbitrary superposition of addresses, and we can-
not know the support of the given superposition
non-destructively.
If we learn that a path was
taken, this collapses the state. Thus, if a QRAM
gate requires any active intervention (such as a
controlled swap like the circuit QRAM), then
the controller must apply that intervention to all
nodes, immediately bringing the (parallelizable)
cost to Ω(N).
In their description of bucket-brigade QRAM,
[52] describe an “active” path through the tree
for each address. If a node requires some external
intervention (such as energy) to perform its role
in the device, then all nodes must receive that
energy or intervention. That is, the “activation”
of a node is all-or-nothing: if we cannot build a
device where all nodes can route data passively
(such as [29] attempts), then all nodes must be
active during a memory access.
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
21

--- PAGE 22 ---
6.3
Hamiltonian Construction
If a QRAM gate is completely passive, i.e., re-
quires no external intervention, then this im-
plies that the Hamiltonian describing the en-
tire QRAM device must be constant through-
out the operation of the gate, since any change
to the Hamiltonian requires external interven-
tion.
This means there must be some Hamil-
tonian HQRACM(T) and time t such that (let
ℏ= 1)
UQRACM(T) = eiHQRACM(T)t.
(13)
We now ask how difficult it will be to establish
such a Hamiltonian. If we need to reconstruct the
Hamiltonian every time we access the QRAM,
then the number of terms (and hence the number
of interventions) gives a lower bound on the cost.
If changing the system’s Hamiltonian needs
Ω(N) interventions (e.g., if we need photon
pulses on all nodes of a routing tree), then our
QRAM is active.
We could instead try to de-
sign a system where we can evolve to the desired
Hamiltonian with fewer interventions, but we will
now sketch the limitations of this approach.
Firstly, we show that a Hamiltonian imple-
menting QRACM access must be fairly complex,
by recalling previous results on simulating Hamil-
tonians with circuits, and using the previous cir-
cuit lower bound from Theorem 5.2.
Lemma 6.1. Let H = Pn−1
j=0 ajhj be a Hamilto-
nian where each hj is an m-qubit Pauli string,
with n such terms, acting on W qubits.
Let
a :=

a0
...an−1
T . If e−iHt enacts a QRACM
unitary for a memory with N rows (i.e., with
log2 N address bits) then to be able to implement
any possible QRACM table, N ∈˜O(Wn ∥a∥1 t).
Proof. We will first show how existing results al-
low for any such Hamiltonian to be simulated
in the circuit model. Each Pauli string is uni-
tary, so it is a trivial (1, 0, 0)-block-encoding
of itself.
We can straightforwardly construct
a state preparation unitary U with U |0⟩=
Pn−1
j=0
√aj |j⟩/
Pn−1
j=0
√aj |j⟩

2, using O(n) cir-
cuit depth. Let b := ⌈log2(n)⌉. Then, using [48,
Lemma 52] we can obtain a (∥a∥1 , b, 0)-block-
encoding of H with O(n) circuit of depth, and
then [48, Theorem 58] gives us a (1, b + 2, ϵ)-
block-encoding of eiHt with a total circuit depth
of O(n log2(n)(∥a∥1 t+ln(1/ϵ)) using O(log2(n))
auxiliary qubits.
Clearly,
this
block-encoding
is
an
ϵ-
approximate implementation of the QRACM
gate eiHt (as per Theorem 5.2). Moreover, this
circuit has ˜O(Wn(∥a∥1 t + ln(1/ϵ)) total gates.
Picking a fixed constant accuracy ϵ ≤1/2, we get
the total gate count of ˜O(Wn ∥a∥1 t). For a fixed
precision, Theorem 5.2 gives the lower-bound of
G ∈˜Ω(N), and so we can conclude that circuits
constructed in this way could only approximate
all possible QRACM tables if the table size
is at most N
∈
˜O(Wn ∥a∥1 t), meaning the
Hamiltonians constructed in this way can also
implement only these QRACM tables.
Theorem 6.1 shows that if our computational
device pays a cost for each term it adds to the
Hamiltonian, and the device must construct the
Hamiltonian for each QRAM access, the cost
scales just as badly as active QRAM.
One way to escape this limitation would be to
construct a device where we only need to con-
struct the Hamiltonian once, so the number of
interventions (n) does not govern the cost to use
the QRAM. One approach would be a Hamilto-
nian such that there is an “idle” eigenstate and
we only need to perturb the system to start it.
For example, one of the proposals for bucket-
brigade QRAM imagines excitable atoms at each
node, excited by input photons. Adding a photon
would start the system on the desired evolution.
Feynman’s original proposal for a quantum
computer [43] (with Kitaev’s refinement [71]) was
a large Hamiltonian that evolved on its own –
i.e., ballistic computation. Practical difficulties
of this scheme mean it has not been experimen-
tally explored (to the best of our knowledge).
Some interesting questions that bear on QRAM
include:
1. Can we add more than one 2-local term
to the Hamiltonian with one intervention
from the controller and energy cost O(1)?
If not, then constructing a Hamiltonian for
QRAQM will cost Ω(N), as the Hamiltonian
will need at least Ω(N) terms just to interact
with all bits of memory.
2. What is a physically realistic error model for
the Hamiltonian terms themselves? Unlike
discussions about the error in the input state
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
22

--- PAGE 23 ---
to a ballistic computation, here we consider
the errors in the Hamiltonian itself, i.e., how
even a perfect input might stray from the de-
sired computational trajectory. Certain pro-
posed QRAM devices partially address this;
see Section 9.4.
Overall, we highlight the notion of a single
Hamiltonian for the QRAM to exemplify the ex-
treme engineering challenges of such a device,
which are far above those of even a large-scale
fault-tolerant quantum computer.
7
Errors
Defining the exact error rate of QRAM is tricky,
since there are several definitions of the error rate
of a channel (e.g., average fidelity vs. minimum
fidelity). For applications like quantum look-ups,
average fidelity is likely more relevant because the
look-up accesses many addresses simultaneously,
whereas for database QAA, we need something
like minimum fidelity.
Generally, we will use these metrics to measure
the quality of the QRAM gates and their com-
ponents, though somewhat imprecisely.
“Error
rate” will refer to the infidelity, 1−F(·, ·). For the
overall QRAM, we want to compare the output
of our real QRAM device (modeled as a quan-
tum channel) to the ideal behaviour: a unitary
channel defined by UQRACM(T) or UQRAQM(T).
Error rates.
It’s well-known that a quan-
tum algorithm with G gates can succeed if each
gate has an error rate of O(1/G), and this is of-
ten a necessary condition as well (with even more
stringent conditions if idle qubits are also error-
prone). The error rates in curent quantum de-
vices are too high for circuits with more than a
few hundred gates, and experts seem to generally
expect the future to centre around fault-tolerant
error-correcting codes, not spectacular jumps in
physical error rates [85].
For this reason, if a QRAM technology requires
error rates per component to scale inversely with
the number of bits of memory we do not consider
this an effective approach to passive hardware-
QRAM, regarding such components as just as un-
likely as quantum computing without error cor-
rection.
Where this might not matter is applications
with only a small number of QRAM accesses. As
an example, if an algorithm needs 106 Hadamard
gates but only 102 QRAM accesses, then physical
error rates of 10−3 are too high for Hadamard
gates but just fine for the QRAM. In this case
we would not need error correction, and in fact
we could decode a logical state to a physical state,
apply the QRAM, then re-encode to the logical
state. This is a risky process for a quantum state,
but if we make few total accesses to the QRAM
then we also do few total decodings. This might
be helpful, but we stress again that this limits
the potential total size of the QRAM.
Bucket-brigade QRAM specifically only needs
per-component error rates to scale inversely with
the log of the number of bits of memory [59].
The overall QRAM error cannot be less than the
physical error rates, so this is not fault-tolerant
at arbitrarily large scales, but we discuss how this
might reach practical scales in Section 9.4.
For the large scales of QRAM which must
be error-corrected, we consider two approaches:
error correction within the QRAM, or QRAM
within the error correction.
7.1
Error-corrected components
Suppose that we attempt to suppress errors in
each component of a QRAM device using some
form of error correction, such as [35] propose for
their method: “scaling up the qRAM necessitates
further exploration in converting each tree node
to a logical qubit and adapting quantum error
correction.”
If this error correction requires active interven-
tion, like a surface code, we have essentially recre-
ated circuit QRAM. Even if the QRAM device
uses specialized hardware, active error correction
implies intervention from the controller and en-
ergy dissipation for each component, pushing us
back into the regime of active hardware-QRAM
with a Ω(N) cost of access.
Passive error correction, where the system nat-
urally removes errors by evolving to lower energy
states, is dubious. There are no known methods
in 2 or 3 physical dimensions and there are sev-
eral broad impossibility results (see the survey in
[27]). Methods for passive error correction would
be a massive breakthrough, but it would also not
be enough for passive QRAM: passive QRAM
also needs passive gates on the error-corrected
components (see Section 6.1).
Because of these difficulties, it seems infeasible
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
23

--- PAGE 24 ---
to build error-correction within the QRAM that
does not lead to access costs at least proportional
to N. Thus, to avoid strict error requirements,
we want a QRAM gate such that the total error
of each access relative to the error rate of each
component is only O(polylog(N)). Using “error”
imprecisely to give a sense of scale, if N = 250(≈
1015) and the error scales as log2 N as in [59],
we “only” need error rates of 4 × 10−7 in each
component to achieve a total error rate of 10−3.
7.2
Error Correction
Instead of correcting the errors within the com-
ponents of a QRAM device, we could instead
attempt to correct the error-affected output of
a noisy device.
Because the set of possible
QRACM gates includes the CNOT and Toffoli
gates, the Gottesman-Knill theorem means we
cannot expect to apply QRACM transversally
to any error-correcting code for which Clifford
gates are also transversal (such as a surface code).
Here we imagine a few different non-exhaustive
approaches:
1. apply QRACM gates independently of the
code and attempt to inject the results into
another fault-tolerant quantum system;
2. construct an error-correcting code for which
QRACM is transversal, and inject other
gates into this code as needed;
3. code switch from a more practical code to a
QRACM-transversal code;
4. find a non-transversal method to fault-
tolerantly apply QRACM gates.
We are pessimistic about QRAM error correc-
tion, for reasons we discuss below, but this area
needs more research. Finding constructions for
satisfactory codes, or proving more impossibility
results, would shed more light on the feasibility
of QRAM.
Transversal codes. There are a few issues with
a QRACM-transversal code.
The transversal gates for a code form a group.
Once we have a transversal QRACM of at least
2 bits of input, if the memory does not encode a
linear function, we can fix certain inputs and pre-
compose with X gates to construct a Toffoli gate
from the QRACM. Once we have transversal Tof-
foli gates, we can compose them to construct all
possible QRACM, or more generally all classical
reversible circuits. Thus, transversal QRACM is
an “all-or-nothing” situation for a code.
Having all possible QRACM gates transversal
for a code is so powerful that it is likely impos-
sible. Almost all codes are proven to fail at this
[86]. This would also contain every level of the
Clifford hierarchy, since the n-multi-controlled
NOT is in the nth level and can be realized
with QRACM (consider access to a table T where
only the N −1 entry is 1, the rest are 0). Us-
ing [91, Theorem 2], this means QRACM cannot
be transversal for any family of subsystem codes
that can correct any probability of qubit loss.
If such a code were to exist, it would also be
unwieldy for computations, as it will require an-
other procedure like state injection to perform H
gates (since Toffoli+H is universal). Switching
from a more practical code to a QRACM-specific
code would need a series of intermediate codes to
preserve the logical state, lest it decohere during
the transition.
To escape these no-go theorems, we could use
a different code for the output qubit, so that we
cannot compose the transveral gates. Using this
strategy allows quantum Reed-Solomon codes to
have transversal Toffoli gates, though extending
the method to n-bit QRACM implies the output
qubit needs to be encoded in 2n physical qubits.
7.3
Gate Teleportation
Universal quantum computation in a surface code
is possible via magic state distillation and gate
teleportation. Several auxiliary qubits are pre-
pared in a fixed state, the controller applies a
physical T gate to each one, then distills them to-
gether with measurement to create a much higher
fidelity state. Using this one state, the T gate can
be teleported onto any qubit in the surface code.
For an analogous process with QRACM, we
define the following gate teleportation channel,
shown in Figure 7. Let HQ be the address and
output space of the QRACM, and let Q(T) :
B(HQ) →B(HQ) be a channel representing
the physical QRACM gate.
We assume (us-
ing ◦to mean function composition) Q(T) =
N1 ◦UQRACM(T) ◦N0 for all T, meaning that
our QRACM process is modelled as a perfect
QRACM access sandwiched between two noise
channels. We model in this way so that the noise
channels are not dependent on the table itself,
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
24

--- PAGE 25 ---
which aids in the proofs.
We have d distillation channels Φ1, . . . , Φd,
with Φi : B(Hi−1 ⊗HQ) →B(Hi ⊗HQ), and the
entire state distillation process produces a state
ρdistill as follows:
ρdistill(T) :=Φd ◦(Id−1 ⊗Q(T))◦
Φd−1 ◦(Id−2 ⊗Q(T))◦
. . .
Φ2 ◦(I1 ⊗Q(T)) ◦Φ1(|0⟩⟨0|) (14)
Letting HQL represent the space of a logically
encoded input and output space, we have a final
teleportation channel ΨT : B(Hd⊗HQ⊗HQL) →
B(HQL). We create a logical QRACM channel
QL(T) by
QL(T)(ρ) = Ψ(ρdistill(T) ⊗ρ).
(15)
The goal is for QL(T)(ρ) to approximate a
QRACM access on the logical state.
In the appendix we prove Theorem C.2, sum-
marized approximately as:
Theorem 7.1. Suppose a QRACM distillation
and teleportation process uses d calls to the phys-
ical QRACM gate.
Then the minimum fidelity
of this distillation process is bounded above by
3
4 + d
q
2
N .
That is, if we want a high fidelity QRACM op-
eration to fit into a fault-tolerant computation,
we must use resources that are asymptotically
similar to those required to do fault-tolerant cir-
cuit QRACM.
The idea of the proof is fairly simple: consid-
ering the process in Figure 7, the input states
to the QRACM are fixed. This means there is
always some address j whose amplitude in the
input state is on the order of O(1/N).
If we
make a new table T ′ such that T ′[j] ̸= T[j], then
this is barely distinguishable to the state distil-
lation process, since so little of the input to the
QRACM will detect this difference.
Yet, once
we distill this state, it must suffice for all logi-
cal inputs. In particular, when our logical input
is precisely the modified address j, the output
between tables T and T ′ should be orthogonal.
This is a contradiction: the distilled states are
too close to create this orthogonal output.
A key component of this proof is that the
state distillation is the same process for all tables,
which is somewhat unrealistic. The specific pre-
and post-processing channels could be adapted
to the specific table at hand. However, counting
arguments similar to Theorem B.3 might still ap-
ply; using only o(N) resources in the distillation
could mean that a single process handles an expo-
nential number of different tables, and the proof
of Theorem C.2 will still suffice. Unlike Theo-
rem B.3, measurements are necessarily involved
in distillation and teleportation, so formalizing
this line of reasoning would need a more sophis-
ticated argument.
Theorem C.2 is a harsh blow to certain ap-
proaches to QRAM, but not all. It states that
minimum fidelity is bounded, so applications
with “broad” inputs to the QRAM, like database
HHL and look-ups to classical pre-computation,
are not yet forbidden. However, database-QAA
suffers greatly. As the QAA hones in on the cor-
rect output, its input to the QRACM will get
closer to this forbidden logical input. As a con-
crete example, if T and T ′ differ in precisely the
address that QAA needs to find, then a distilled-
and-teleported QRACM will obviously fail.
As a final note, since a QRAQM process im-
plies a QRACM process by simply initializing
the quantum memory to a classical input, Theo-
rem C.2 forbids similar QRAQM distillation and
teleportation processes.
Heralded QRAM. By “heralded” we mean any
QRAM technology involving some measurement
which indicates whether the QRAM access suc-
ceeded or not, typically also implying that, if it
succeeded, the fidelity of the resulting access is
very high.
Heralded processes are perfect candidates for
gate teleportation because we can try as many
times as we want to produce a single good magic
state, then teleport it into the code. The impos-
sibility of QRAM state teleportation is a serious
blow to heralded QRAM. We cannot produce a
resource state independently of the “live” data to
which we want to apply the QRAM, so we need
to instead input the real data into the QRAM,
somehow ensuring that when the QRAM fails,
this does not decohere the input.
Logical Inputs.
Another potential route to
save a process like this is to use the logical input
as part of the QRACM access. This is more anal-
ogous to a transveral QRACM access, albeit with
a very broad definition of “transversal” meaning
only that we use a physical gate as part of the
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
25

--- PAGE 26 ---
|0⟩
Φ1
Q(T)
Φ1
Q(T)
. . .
. . .
Φd−1
Q(T)
Φd
ΨT
ρL
ρ′
L
Goal: ρ′
L ≈UQRACM(T)ρLUQRACM(T)†
Figure 7: Schematic of a QRACM disillation and teleportation. The channels Φ1, . . . , Φd attempt to distill the output
of accesses to the physical QRACM table T, denoted Q(T). A final teleportation channel ΨT attempts to use the
resulting distilled state to “teleport” the QRACM gate onto a logical state input ρL.
process to enact a logical gate.
This is a risky process, since the QRACM
might noisily decohere the logical input. We want
the full logical QRACM gate to have a much
higher fidelity than the physical QRACM gate,
so there must be little-to-no correlation between
the logical state and the input to the QRACM.
Intuitively, this suggests an extension of Theo-
rem C.2 might exist, since if there is no corre-
lation, then a similar table-swapping trick might
work. We leave the details of a proof or disproof
of this idea to future work.
8
Classical RAM
The extensive list of restrictions in Section 6
raises an important question of whether these
same issues apply to classical memory. Here we
apply the same arguments as Section 6 to clas-
sical memory.
Either classical memory is fun-
damentally easier and escapes the restrictions of
quantum memory, or the restrictions are already
accounted in real-world analysis and use cases of
large-scale classical memory.
8.1
Area-Time Metric
As Section 1.1 discusses, the central thesis of
the memory peripheral model, and most cri-
tiques of QRAM, is that the qubits in the QRAM
(and possibly the memory controllers themselves)
could perform other computations more efficient
than just the QRAM access. Succinctly, N bits
of active QRAM is more like Θ(N) parallel pro-
cessors ([103] states this explicitly).
This same argument applies to classical mem-
ory, and can mainly be justified by arguing that
the cost to construct one bit of memory is pro-
portional to the cost to construct one processor
([15, 16] cost algorithms in currency for this rea-
son).
While the ratio of costs might be quite
high, it is constant relative to the input size of
any problem, suggesting that the ratio of mem-
ory to processors should stay roughly constant.
Some real-world examples of this phenomenon:
• Google’s “IMAGEN” [99], a huge text-to-
image diffusion model, used 10 TB of pub-
lic data plus an internal dataset of a similar
size. The training used 512 TPU-v4 chips.
Adding up all the independent processing
units (i.e., arithmetic logic units (ALUs)),
each chip has 221 parallel “processors”, for a
total of 230 processors [54]. This means there
is only about 18 kB of memory per ALU.
• GPT-3 used 570 GB of training data and
used 175 billion parameters [28]. They use
a supercomputer with more than 285,000
CPUs and 10,000 NVIDA V100 GPUs. Each
GPU has 212 CUDA cores, totalling at least
226 parallel processing units, giving 11 kB
per processor.
• In the current largest supercomputer in the
world, “Frontier” [38], each node has 5 TB
of memory and 4 AMD Instinct MI250X
GPUs. Each GPU has 14,080 stream pro-
cessors [4]. This memory/processor ratio is
much higher, but still not huge, at about 89
MB/processor.
While the individual processors in a GPU or
TPU are not what we usually think of as a “pro-
cessor”, they are capable of sequential compu-
tation. Machine learning benefits because it is
a very parallelizable task, but many problems
with algorithms using QRAM also have alterna-
tive parallel classical algorithms.
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
26

--- PAGE 27 ---
All of this favours the area-time cost model
for classical computation, where the cost is the
product of the total amount of hardware by the
runtime of an algorithm.
A further motivation is parallelism, as in [22].
Many classical algorithms parallelize perfectly,
like the machine learning training above, the lin-
ear algebra in Section 4, classical lattice attacks,
and unstructured search.
This gives little rea-
son to favour a computer with a large amount of
memory with few processors, since for only a con-
stant factor increase, many processors can share
that memory and achieve the same result faster.
As [17] say about a chip with most of its com-
ponents idle: “any such chip is obviously highly
suboptimal: for essentially the same investment
in chip area one can build a much more active
chip that stores the same data and that at the
same time performs many other useful computa-
tions”. More directly, someone paying for server
time literally pays for the area-time product of
their computation.
To summarize, the notion that the qubits and
controllers in QRAM can be repurposed to more
fruitful tasks is an argument that carries over di-
rectly to classical computing, and it is actually
applied to large, high-performance computing for
vast improvements in runtime with little increase
in total cost.
8.2
Active Components
We argued in Section 6 that a QRAM device will
probably need interactions with an external en-
vironment for the components to function prop-
erly. The same is true for classical memory, but
here we spell out the biggest difference between
quantum and classical memory: classical memory
only needs O(log N) active components to access
memory.
Here we say that a component is “active” if it
is capable of performing whatever action it needs
to properly execute a memory access, and assume
that if it is inactive any memory access requiring
that component will fail. As an example, in the
SWAP-based circuit in Figure 4, each node is ac-
tive only while the SWAP gates are applied to
it. In the bucket-brigade proposal of [52] with
atoms as routers, the atoms must be stimulated
to be active. By our definition of passive vs. ac-
tive QRAM, most of the components in an active
QRAM will require external intervention to be
active.
We sketch here how a classical memory could
work with only O(log n) active components:
there is a binary tree of routers, all of which are
powered off. Each router is capable of receiving
a signal which it amplifies and uses to decide to
start drawing power. To route a memory request,
the router in layer i of the tree, once activated,
uses the ith address bit to decide whether to for-
ward the address to its left or right child node.
The process then repeats.
In this way, only O(log N) routers are actu-
ally on. It is able to do this because there is no
restriction about leaking access patterns to the
environment.
Our concern for quantum memory is that if
activating a router requires any interaction with
the external environment, then that interaction
cannot depend on the quantum state input to the
memory, lest the environment become entangled
with the state and decohere the input.
Thus,
for such an architecture, the environment (the
control hardware) must decide, independently of
the input state, which components to activate.
More specifically, if the input is a uniform su-
perposition of addresses, all the routers in the
QRAM must be activated: if one router is not
activated, then any address request sent through
this router will fail.
Based on the size of the
QRAM, there must be Ω(N) routers, so we need
to activate Ω(N) routers for a successful QRAM
access with a uniform superposition of addresses
(unless the QRAM is passive).
Even in algorithms where the input superposi-
tion over addresses only has support on a subset
of the QRAM memory cells, such as in the final
queries in Grover database search , the control
hardware must act as though the input could be
a uniform superposition.
For instance, if the control hardware decides
not to supply power to routers for certain ad-
dresses, any superposition query with support on
those addresses will fail. To correctly handle all
queries using only some of routers, the control
hardware would need to identify which addresses
are supported in the coherent quantum state and
which are not. However, since the control hard-
ware operates classically, acquiring this informa-
tion would collapse the quantum state, thereby
although technically there would still be non-zero sup-
port on most states
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
27

--- PAGE 28 ---
invalidating the algorithm.
Thus, to reiterate,
the control hardware must treat this as though
the input could be a uniform superposition.
Incorporating algorithm-specific analysis, the
control hardware might know that there is a
particular subset of M memory locations such
that all possible input addresses will be in this
subset (this happens in certain quantum lattice
sieves [33, 73]).
Then we can treat this as a
QRAM access to only M bits (with a cost of
Ω(M)) rather than N, since we could construct
a QRAM device that only accesses those bits.
However, this relies on knowing exactly which lo-
cations will have zero support in any input state,
and in most algorithms this is not known (and
thus this would not be a general QRAM). For ex-
ample, in a Grover database search, if we know
that the desired element is not in certain ad-
dresses, we’ve already solved part of the search
problem!
Example: Flash memory. Real-world classical
memory devices do not precisely follow this low-
power model. Following the description of [30],
flash memory is divided into chips, which are di-
vided into dies, which are divided into planes.
Within each plane are thousands of blocks, each
of which contains hundreds of pages, each of
which contains thousands of bits.
The device
does not address individual bits, but full pages.
Each of these components are integrated circuits,
and mostly we do not care about their exact
structure or function, since our concern is the
fact that each one (chip, die, plane, and block)
must have a mechanism to select specific subcom-
ponents based on an address as input.
For example, near the bottom of this hierarchy,
to access a specific block within a plane, two mul-
tiplexers (similar in function to a QRAM routing
tree) decode the address of the block into a col-
umn and a row. A signal is sent along a wire at
that column and at that row such that it activates
the block at a memory location at the intersec-
tion of the selected column and row. From there,
another multiplexer selects the appropriate page,
and the device acts on that page (to read, write,
etc.).
Abstracting this slightly, each block performs
the equivalent of an AND gate: it returns the
memory address only if there is a signal on the
column bit line and on the row word line. Thus,
as with QRAM, the number of “gates” is pro-
portional to the number of pages of memory;
however, in contrast to QRAM, only the “gates”
on the active lines consume energy.
In other
words, the energy consumption to address one
block should be proportional to the size of the
length of each column and the length of each row
(approximately the square root of the total num-
ber of blocks), and experiment confirms this [82].
This experimental result implies also that the
analogous process within the block, to address
the page, consumes energy only in the blocks
on the active row and column lines, at most.
This is substantially fewer than the total num-
ber of blocks, each of which has its own page de-
coder, meaning that the page decoding process
matches the abstract approach of only activat-
ing the addressed sub-unit of memory. Here the
analogy stops: addressing a single page within
a block sends different signals to addressed and
non-addressed pages, so the energy per active
block is proportional to the size of the block.
Above the block level, to achieve minimum en-
ergy consumption we would expect each die to
only activate the necessary planes, and each chip
to only activate the necessary dies. Instead, the
exact opposite happens: flash SSDs will group
blocks and pages on different chips and planes
into superblocks and superpages, which are ac-
cessed simultaneously.
The purpose is so “the
SSD can fully exploit the internal parallelism
offered by multiple planes/chips, which in turn
maximizes write throughput” [30].
Here again
we see the “repurpose memory into processors”
maxim: SSD designers expect that any applica-
tion needing access to the SSD will have enough
processors to reap more benefit from fast parallel
access than from a more energy-efficient design.
Active memory. Any volatile classical memory,
such as DRAM, is analogous to active hardware-
QRAM, in that the total energy cost for N bits
is at least proportional to N. In fact, it’s even
worse: volatile memory requires Ω(N) energy per
clock cycle.
Despite this, DRAM sees widespread use. For
consumer-level computers, RAM is often not the
highest energy component, consuming less than
any other component in an idle smartphone [31]
and similarly for laptops. Though the asymptotic
cost might increase with memory size, at practi-
cal sizes this is irrelevant. This cost might matter
for large-scale applications; however, as in Sec-
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
28

--- PAGE 29 ---
tion 8.1, in practice other components are also
scaled up for these applications, so the energy
draw of the RAM is not the main cost. Again,
the area-time model captures this: total power
draw increases with both the amount of volatile
memory and the number of processors, so effi-
cient machines will scale both proportionally.
8.3
Error Propagation and Correction
In Section 6 we claimed that QRAM technolo-
gies that require error rates to scale as O(1/N)
per component will probably not be useful. One
could make the same argument that if a sin-
gle gate at one of the row and column lines of
DRAM or flash memory spontaneously emits cur-
rent, then it will create an error in the RAM.
Thus, we should expect classical RAM to need
component error rates to also scale as O(1/N).
Why is this acceptable classically?
The first reason is that extremely high fi-
delity classical components are fundamentally
much easier to produce.
Classical components
have essentially one dimension of error: bit flips.
In contrast, quantum components suffer from
analogous bit-flip errors, but also phase-flip er-
rors. Two-dimensonal passively corrected mem-
ory, which is provably impossible for quantum
memory except in esoteric settings [27], is easy
and ubiquitous classically (viz. hard disk drives).
While this analogy holds for non-volatile mem-
ory, volatile classical memory has a further ad-
vantage from the continuous energy flow to help
correct errors.
The technique of a “cold boot
attack” (such as [56]) highlights that volatile
DRAM is somewhat non-volatile, but it just has
an unacceptably high error rate unless power is
continuously applied. Recall that we cannot ap-
ply power continuously to a passive hardware-
QRAM, or else it becomes an active hardware-
QRAM. Again, if a QRAM device does pay this
cost, such as circuit QRAM, it could work per-
fectly well, but many applications (e.g. database
HHL and database QAA) lose their advantage.
Second, classical memory can, and does, per-
form error correction. Circuit QRAM is allowed
to require O(1/N) error because it can be part
of an error corrected quantum computer that
achieves that level of noise with polylogarithmic
overhead. Beyond the consumer level, classical
memory also uses error correcting codes because
the overall failure rate is too high.
The error
rate for RAM, in failures per Mbit per million
hours of operation, is somewhere around 25-75
failures [101] or 0.2 to 0.8 [116], though with high
variance not only between devices but also over
time for a given device.
This error rate shows two points: first, it is low
enough to be negligible for most consumer appli-
cations, and second, it is still high enough to be
relevant at large scales. This exactly matches our
claims about QRAM. The classical difference is
that the achievable error rate for physical com-
ponents is much, much smaller.
Finally, errors present less of a problem for
classical computing because of the no-cloning
theorem. Modern large-scale, high-performance
computing often follows the “checkpoint/restart
model” [50], where the computer periodically
saves the entire state of memory so that it can re-
sume in the case of a fault. A quantum computer
cannot do this because of the no-cloning theorem.
Instead, the error rate of each operation must be
driven so low that the entire computation can
proceed without fault.
8.4
Latency
All memory devices, classical and quantum, must
contend with signal latency and connectivity. If
connections between qubits are limited to fixed
length, then because we live in Euclidean space
(a) each qubit can have only a constant num-
ber of connections, and (b) sending data between
qubits on opposite ends of the memory requires
at least W 1/d+o(1) connections in d-dimensional
space, if there are W total qubits. Long-range
connections still suffer from signal latency, where
– asymptotically – the time for signals to propa-
gate across a memory device is still W 1/d+o(1).
We emphasize that even light-speed signals
have noticeable latency: for a 3 GHz processor,
light travels only 10 cm in each clock cycle. We
often don’t see this, because (again) huge classi-
cal data structures typically co-exist with enor-
mous numbers of parallel processors (as [22] pre-
dict based on this reasoning).
Classical mem-
ory latency has led to tremendous effort in effi-
cient caching and routing. In contrast, quantum
memory access “takes the mother of all cache
misses” [100], since any timing information effec-
tively measures which path the access took, and
hence which address.
Thus, the case where latency would be an issue
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
29

--- PAGE 30 ---
– where a single processor attempts to process an
enormous amount of data with completely unpre-
dictable queries – is extremely rare for classical
computers. Yet applications like database HHL
typically assume a single quantum processor, and
even when assuming parallel access like [13], the
quantum memory cannot efficiently cache. Over-
all, quantum memory latency seems more diffi-
cult to manage than classical.
9
Bucket-Brigade QRAM
The bucket-brigade model of QRAM [52] is the
most ubiquitous. We describe it here and discuss
various proposals to realize the bucket-brigade
and a recent result on its error rates.
9.1
Construction
The original proposal differed slightly from the
circuit version we showed in Section 5.3. It re-
ferred to “atoms” and “photons”, and we will
continue to use this terminology, though any
physical system with similar properties will suf-
fice.
As in the circuit case, we use a binary tree
of nodes to route incoming signals to the de-
sired memory cell. However, each node is now
an atom, and the lines between nodes represent
paths for a photon. The atoms have three states:
|W⟩A (“wait”), |L⟩A (“left”), and |R⟩A (“right”),
and are initialized in |W⟩A. The photons have
two states, |L⟩P and |R⟩P .
For QRAM access, we generate a photon from
each address qubit (from most significant to
least), where |0⟩generates |L⟩P and |1⟩gener-
ates |R⟩P . When the photon reaches an atom, it
interacts depending on the state of the atom:
• If the atom is in the wait state |W⟩A, the
photon is absorbed and transforms the atom
to |L⟩A or |R⟩A, depending on whether the
photon was in |L⟩P or |R⟩P .
• If the atom was in the state |L⟩A, the pho-
ton is deflected forwards along the left path,
with no change in atomic state.
• If the atom was in the state |R⟩A, the photon
is deflected forwards along the right path,
with no change in atomic state.
Sequentially sending one photon for each address
qubit will create a path in the tree of nodes to
the addressed memory location.
The intended feature of this architecture is
that if we can produce a physical system with
these properties, then the entire system needs
no external intervention besides inputting pho-
tons. We’re meant to imagine something like the
Galton board or Digi-Comp II [53], wooden de-
vices where balls enter on one side and propagate
through with momentum or gravity. These are all
ballistic computations.
Recall that if we must intervene at every step,
then the system is no longer ballistic and loses
many of its advantages.
For example, in their
original proposal, [51] suggest stimulated Raman
emission for the atom-photon interactions; how-
ever, stimulating that emission with an exter-
nal field requires work from the control program
and/or environment. This implies a cost growing
proportional to N, which is within a constant
factor of circuit QRAM!
This is not the only way to construct a bucket-
brigade QRAM. For example, the atoms could
have just the two states |L⟩A and |R⟩A and be
all initialized to one direction, as in [59]. Their
description requires a swap between the incident
photon and the node atoms, which requires some
active intervention, since (as in the circuit case)
we will need to intervene to change the behaviour
from swapping into the node atom or propagating
through. Hence, two-level photons with two-level
atoms is inherently an active hardware-QRAM.
These are not exhaustive examples, but give
some flavour for how bucket-brigade QRAM
could be realized.
9.2
Reversibility
A passive bucket-brigade QRAM will need to
evolve under a single Hamiltonian, and thus each
transition must be reversible. This creates some
challenges, since the intended function of a node
atom is that once it transitions from the wait
state |W⟩A to either the left or right states, it
should stay in those other states. However, this is
not reversible. More plausibly, the left and right
states will spontaneously re-emit the photon that
excited the wait state. In fact this behaviour ap-
peared from the mathematics of a more complete
Hamiltonian analysis in [29].
This could be a feature, however. We also want
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
30

--- PAGE 31 ---
to restore the QRAM nodes to their idle state
after each access, so if the nodes are carefully en-
gineered so that the final layer’s relaxation time
is smallest, they will spontaneously re-emit their
excitations in reverse order, neatly sending all the
control photons back through the routing tree to
the address register.
Ensuring this happens is
an often overlooked problem of passive hardware-
QRAM.
More generally, even a simplistic analysis of
reversibility creates problems. Considering each
node, for each of the three output lines there are
5 states to consider: no photon or a {left,right}
photon propagating {up,down}. For the atom,
there are three states (possibly more if we imag-
ine a “timer” of how long until an excited atom
re-emits its photon).
This means each node
could be in one of 375 different states, and the
QRAM Hamiltonian must act reversibly on them.
The necessary functions for routing constrain this
only slightly.
For example, if a |0⟩P photon propagates up-
ward from one of the child nodes and reaches
an atom in the wait state, what should happen?
If it continues propagating upward we lose the
favourable scaling proven in [59]. Instead, if it
is reflected backwards, or to the other side, then
an erroneous spontaneous emission at some point
in the tree will stay constrained to oscillate back
and forth among at most three nodes.
A final note on this is that if we must ac-
tively reset the state of all the nodes in a bucket-
brigade, this has cost Ω(N), pushing us back to
an active hardware-QRAM. If we do not reset the
nodes actively, they must reset themselves. If any
errors occur in this process, they will persist to
the next QRAM access.
9.3
Proposed Technologies
Trapped Ions
A particular architecture for
bucket-brigade QRAM, proposed in [51], is to use
trapped ions as the nodes, which would deflect
and absorb photons as desired.
However, this
raises two problems.
The atoms must be carefully positioned to en-
sure the deflected photons travel between the two
atoms. Thus, they must be fixed in place some-
how. Earnshaw’s theorem forbids a static elec-
tric field from trapping a charged particle, so ion
traps require continously changing fields, such as
a quadropole ion trap.
Continuously changing
the field requires a constant input of energy.
Second, we need extremely high probabilities
of absorption and deflection for the QRAM prop-
erly. With, e.g., 240 memory elements, we would
need error rates of something like ϵ/402 for an
overall error of ϵ in the QRAM access, since there
are
 40
2
 atom-photon interactions for even a sin-
gle address. This seems implausible for trapped
ions. [51] solve this with stimulated emissions,
but as mentioned above this is no longer passive.
If this interaction problem is solved,
the
QRAM routing tree looks like a full-fledged
trapped ion quantum computer. Each node has
a trapped ion with spectacularly low error rates
and a dedicated high-precision laser or microwave
emitter.
The ions can communicate with each
other by the same photons used for routing mem-
ory addresses.
[62] propose microtoroidal resonators instead
of trapped ions, but they have the same issue of
requiring external photons to drive the interac-
tions at each node.
Transmons
Breaking from literal atoms and
photons, [29] proposed a bucket-brigade where
the “atoms” consist of 3 superconducting trans-
mons.
This provided enough parameters (fre-
quencies, capacitance, etc.) to precisely tune for
a high certainty that photons will be absorbed
and routed as desired. Their proposed device is
truly passive and the desired photon transmission
probabilities are over 95%.
They mention a critical flaw in their technique
which prevents it from scaling. The first photon,
which modifies the state of the transmon from
“wait” to “left” or “right”, must be at a different
frequency from the second photon, which will be
routed left or right. This means once the second
photon is routed, it cannot modify the state of
another device. In other words, the routing tree
can have at most one layer.
Solutions might exist. They propose increasing
the frequency of the photon, though this requires
external energy input to the device and must
be done without learning which path the photon
took while not scaling energy proportional to the
number of transmons, a great challenge. Instead,
one might also use slightly different parameters in
each layer of the tree, so the frequency which ex-
cites nodes in layer i is the same frequency that
layer i −1 will route. The precise approach in
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
31

--- PAGE 32 ---
[29] does not allow this; the range of plausible
parameters forbids such layering.
Finally, while the transmission probabilities
are high for near-term devices, they are insuf-
ficient to scale to a large memory device or a
high-fidelity application.
Despite these issues, this is a promising ap-
proach, as it explicitly accounts for the funda-
mental issues in passive hardware-QRAM.
Photonic
transistors
[111]
constructed
a
photonic transistor with transmons in optical
cavities. This could take the place of the node
“atoms”, but the photon is not absorbed by the
transmon and instead resonates with it in the
cavity. In a bucket-brigade, the photon from one
bit of the address would need to resonate with all
the nodes in one level of the tree, which a single
photon could not do coherently.
Heralded Routers
[35] propose a “heralded”
version of bucket-brigade QRAM. The heralded
aspect is that they use a photon-atom interaction
wherein the photonic state is teleported into the
atom, so the device must measure the photon.
If the measurement detects no photon, then the
photon was lost due to, e.g., propogation error,
and the QRAM access can be restarted.
Cru-
cially, this avoids the issue of heralding described
in Section 7.3, since measuring photon loss re-
veals only that a photon was lost, not which pho-
ton was lost.
A crucial design choice is that all routers in
a single layer of the routing scheme must share
their measurement of the photon. Measuring at
each detector would immediately reveal the rout-
ing path and decohere the address state, so in-
stead we must replace the detectors each each
router with waveguides that all converge at a sin-
gle detector. Similarly, they require a method to
simultaneously measure the spins of Ω(N) atoms;
they propose an ancillary photon for this. Alto-
gether this will lead to one measurement per layer
of the routing tree, so the controller only needs
to perform O(log2 N) operations.
As written, their design requires a Hadamard
gate on the atom in each router to perform the
oblivious teleportation described above, which
means Ω(N) active operations to perform a mem-
ory access. However, they also need the atoms
initialized in the |+⟩state to obliviously teleport
the photonic input states onto the routers’ atoms.
Thus, they could skip both operations by some-
how simultaneously measuring the spins of all the
atoms in the {|+⟩, |−⟩} basis.
Since only one
atom will not be in the |+⟩state, measuring the
parity of all the spins will perform the necessary
teleportation if no errors have occurred.
If this measurement detects an even parity,
then no correction must be done and all atoms
are initialized for a subsequent read; however,
odd parity means one atom, at an unknown po-
sition which is correlated with the address reg-
ister, is in the |−⟩state and must be corrected.
This is problematic: we now need a second pro-
cess or device to correctly route a signal to cor-
rect that atom, without ever classically learning
where the signal is going. Perhaps this could be
accomplished with another photon sent through
the system (which is already set to route photons
to the atom in the |−⟩state).
Thus, there are some missing components for
this to fully realize a passive hardware-QRACM.
Moreoever, it suffers from the same ion trap
QRACM issues of needing high-probability atom-
photon interactions and passively trapped ions.
[35] also propose teleporting the address into
the nodes of the tree before the routing process,
which requires Θ(N) gates applied to the device
and thus fails to realize passive hardware-QRAM.
Photonic CNOT.
Another heralded QRAM
is [113], who use a post-selected photonic CNOT
for their quantum router such that each routing
operation has, at best, a 0.0727 chance of fail-
ure. This means we can apply at most 9 routers
sequentially before we have only a 50% chance
of success. Bucket-brigade QRAM with n layers
requires
 n
2
 routing operations, meaning 9 rout-
ings is only about 5 layers (i.e., a 32 bit mem-
ory). However, because their scheme requires the
control and signal photons to enter the router
simultaneously, we may need several routers in
each layer to simultaneously route more address
qubits. Ultimately, this approach doesn’t scale.
9.4
Error Rates
An advantage of the bucket-brigade approach –
even as a circuit-based QRAM – is favourable
error scaling, shown by [59]. To give an intuition
of their argument, in any circuit-based QRAM,
there are Ω(N) gates and so we might expect
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
32

--- PAGE 33 ---
each gate to need error rates less than O(1/N).
This is true for unary QRAM, which one can see
with a simple analysis. However, with the bucket
brigade, errors can get stuck. That is, if an error
occurs on some node deep in the tree, this does
not necessarily affect any other nodes.
The only way for errors to affect the final result
is if they propagate to the root node somehow.
At each node, the routing circuit only swaps from
one of its two child nodes, so the error will only
propagate upward if it is on the correct side. As
there is only one path which will get routed all
the way to the top of the tree – the path rep-
resenting the actual address in the query – an
error propagates to the root only if it occurs on
this path. But only O(log N) qubits are on this
path.
Errors could propagate in other ways; for ex-
ample, if the control qubit has an error and the
routing qubits have errors, then this will erro-
neously create a path that propagates further
up. But for the error to keep propagating up-
ward, a very precise sequence of errors must oc-
cur to create a path for it, and this is unlikely for
even modestly low probability errors.
Overall,
if qubit undergoes an error channel with prob-
ability p, the error of the final readout is only
O(p · log2(N)) [59].
The bucket-brigade requires all nodes to be in
the “wait” state at the start of an access. How-
ever, errors in a previous access that change this
state could persist to later accesses, depending
on the device’s Hamiltonian. If the probability
of a persistent error is p for each node in each
access, then after Q accesses the proportion of
error-ridden nodes grows proportional to Q2p.
Generally, the per-component error rate p must
still be exponentially small for applications like
database QAA, but for other applications, like
quantum linear algebra (see Section 4.4), higher
error rates could be manageable.
Moreover, we propose that a bucket-brigade
QRAM system could be partially passive.
Fol-
lowing the observation that errors in the root
nodes of are more destructive, we can run full
error-correction on the first k layers of the bucket-
brigade tree. If k is selected to be a constant,
or at least o(log N), then this circumvents the
issues with active QRAM that we have exten-
sively highlighted.
The remaining log(N) −k
layers would be a collection of smaller, passive
QRAMs joined to the error-corrected root nodes.
This encounters the same problem of interfacing
noisy components with quantum data encoded
into a logical state that we discuss in Section 7.
This proposal requires 2k error-corrected nodes,
and we expect that the overall probability of er-
ror would scale something like O(p(log(N)−k)2).
This wouldn’t change the asymptotic error rate
of bucket-brigade, but with the same physical er-
ror rate, this method could allow larger memories
to become practical than a fully passive bucket-
brigade architecture would allow.
Example.
To show why the small bucket-
brigade error rates are somewhat unique, we de-
scribe here an alternative readout circuit that
does require O(1/N) gate error, as shown in Fig-
ure 8. To explain this circuit, we add an extra
layer L of qubits at the leaves of the routing tree
(shown as boxes in Figure 8).
We then add a
single extra qubit prepared in the |1⟩state, and
propagate it through the tree by applying the
routing circuits at each node. This routes the |1⟩
to the location indexed by the address regiter.
From there, for every i such that T[i] = 1, we
apply a CNOT from the leaf at the ith address
to a qubit in L. This means this final layer of
qubits is all zeros if T[i] = 0, and has precisely
one qubit in the |1⟩state otherwise. Thus, we
can read out the result by computing the parity
of this final layer.
Parity is an appealing operation in the surface
code, since it can be done by conjugating a multi-
target CNOT (itself depth-1 in a surface code) by
Hadamard gates.
The drawback of this method is that if an er-
ror occurs anywhere on this final layer of ancilla
qubits, it will propagate immediately to the out-
put. Thus, the qubits and gates in L would need
to have error rates of O(1/N).
10
Other Proposals
Here we summarize some other proposals which
do not follow the bucket-brigade approach, and
detail the ways in which they fail to provide pas-
sive hardware-QRAM, as they are currently de-
scribed.
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
33

--- PAGE 34 ---
T
0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0
⊕⊕
⊕
(a)
⊕⊕⊕⊕⊕⊕⊕⊕
Output
(b)
Figure 8: Alternative, suboptimal bucket-brigade read-
out forcing the readout gates to have error rates of
O(1/N). The blue nodes are those with |1⟩during the
memory access for a specific address (in this case, i = 2).
Notice that the parity in the second step only needs to
use leaves for i with T[i] = 1, but we include all of them
for clarity.
10.1
Time-bins
Many applications and methods to store quan-
tum states with photon echoes exist (e.g. [109]),
but [83] propose an additional addressing com-
ponent to turn this storage into QRAM. To sum-
marize their method, there is a memory cav-
ity with M ≫N atoms and a control cavity.
To store data, the device would send quantum
states encoded as photons into the memory cav-
ity, where they would excite the memory atoms.
The memory atoms can replay this input via a
two-pulse echo technique; sending a second pulse
will prompt the atoms to re-emit the photons
that were sent in.
Importantly, if photons are
sent in one-at-a-time, they will be re-emitted in
a time-reversed order.
Thus, to read the memory, the device sends a
pulse which prompts the memory cavity to re-
emit its stored state. With just the memory cav-
ity, this would re-emit all input states at classi-
cally determined times, giving us CRAQM but
not QRAQM. For quantum addressing they use
a second control cavity. The control cavity con-
tains an atom such that, when this atom is in
its ground state, the memory cavity cannot emit
any photons. However, when the control cavity’s
atom is excited, it allows the transfer of photons
out of the memory cavity.
An address state P
i αi |i⟩must then be trans-
lated so that each address |i⟩is entangled with
a photonic state |ψi(t)⟩which reaches the con-
trol cavity at precisely the right time to allow
the memory cavity’s photons to pass through. In
this way, other addresses, which will not be en-
tangled with a photon pulse at that time, will not
allow any emission from the memory cavity.
The fundamental nature of the time-bin ad-
dressing means that this requires Ω(N) time for
each memory access. The purported feature of
this method is the minimal hardware require-
ments (though it still requires Ω(N) atoms in
the memory cavity), but unary circuit QRAM
already provides a near-optimal circuit on the
Ω(N) side of the time-hardware tradeoff of
QRAM circuits.
In [88], they use a second type of pulse to deco-
here a memory atom so that it will only re-emit
once an identical pulse is sent to it. Using differ-
ent frequencies of pulses to store different mem-
ory bits, this could reduce the total time require-
ment, at the expense of needing higher precision
in pulse frequencies.
There is still an issue of how the time-bin pho-
tonic address state is created.
As an example
of how this could be created, consider the unary
circuit QRAM. It classically iterates through ad-
dresses j, and for each address j, flips the state
of a control qubit if the address in superposition
equals j. Suppose that flipping the control qubit
puts it into an excited state which can be stim-
ulated to emit a photon. If we do this sequen-
tially, then at time tj, only the address state |j⟩
will cause a photon to be emitted, thus the pres-
ence of photons at that time is in superposition
and entangled with the state of the address. In
this way, applying this stimulation instead of a
CNOT turns the unary circuit QRAM into a cir-
cuit that translates an address superposition into
a superposition of time-bin photons.
Unfortunately, this has solved the addressing
problem by using another QRAM circuit to cre-
ate the address!
While superpositions of pho-
tons at different points in time may be a native
quantum state in some architecture, for other ar-
chitectures, creating such a state is essentially a
quantum addressing problem, which is the diffi-
cult problem of QRAM anyway. The decohering
pulses of [88] face a similar issue, where they must
be addressed and sent in a coherent superposition
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
34

--- PAGE 35 ---
T
Trapped atom
Lens
Polarizing beam splitter
Mirror
Lasers
Figure 9: Schematic of quantum optical fanout QRAM, almost exactly as shown in [51].
|0⟩
|1⟩
|0⟩
Readout mode
Readout mode
Spatial address modes
Transfer modes
Figure 10: Phase gate fanout QRACM, from [51]. The
address qubits route the address modes (red), which ex-
cites the phase-control qubits (blue transmons). The ex-
cited phase-control qubits are highlighted yellow. This
will cause exactly one cavity’s transfer mode to resonate
(dark green), exciting the 2 memory qubits (bottom,
blue) for that address. The memory qubits change the
phase of the readout modes (yellow) which can be de-
tected. The arrangement of the two types of memory
qubits (shown as white and grey) represents the data:
in this case, the table is 01010001.
to create a QRAM device.
As a final note, many aspects of the scheme in
[83] require Ω(N) active interventions. For exam-
ple, with the photon echo technique, stimualating
the memory cavity to emit its states requires a
phase-flipping pulse on all M atoms for each time
bin, meaning Ω(N) pulses that each require Ω(N)
energy. As in other proposals with photon-atom
interactions, the control cavity requires a stim-
ulating pulse for each interaction (thus, another
Ω(N) stimulating pulses).
10.2
Quantum Optical Fanout
[51] describe an architecture using only log N
trapped atoms, and instead encode the QRAM
access in N spatial modes of light.
The basic
principle is this: each bit of the address becomes
one trapped atom, and then each beam interacts
with the atom, and if the atom is in |1⟩, the pho-
ton is polarized differently than if the atom is
|0⟩.
Then the photon beam is sent through a
half-wave plate which spatially separates differ-
ent polarizations, thus doubling the number of
photonic modes and ensuring that an input beam
is directed according to the state of the atom.
Figure 9 duplicates Figure 4 from [51], with a
crucial difference: we show the schematic for an
8-bit address, rather than only 3. This immedi-
ately highlights the problem: the number of spa-
tial modes grows exponentially with the number
of address bits, but they must be focused back
onto a single point.
If the photons are not aimed precisely, then af-
ter interacting with the atom they will drift into
another spatial mode. This causes an error. The
precision required for this aiming is O(1/N) for
N bits of memory.
This seems to be the only
physical mechanism for errors to propagate from
one sequence of spatial modes to another, sug-
gesting that the overall error scaling has simi-
lar robustness to bucket-brigade QRAM, but the
aiming argument above means that each compo-
nent requires a precision scaling as O(1/N) or it
will have an error.
Intuitively, it doesn’t mat-
ter whether errors propagate across “paths” of
access, if all paths have an error.
Trying to guide the photons with a waveguide
does not fix the problem, regardless of the minia-
turization we achieve. Taking the perspective of
the atom, the sources and receptors of the pho-
tons and must occupy non-overlapping sections
of all radial paths out of the atom.
If either
source or receptor has a smaller cross-sectional
area, then we can move it closer, but it occupies
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
35

--- PAGE 36 ---
the same “arc-area” from the atom’s perspective.
This means the precision of the beam must be the
same – O(1/N) – no matter the absolute area of
the photonic components.
Thus, in the exact formulation given, errors in
this QRAM must scale infeasibly. We can won-
der whether a different technology, inspired by
this approach, could succeed. A core function of
this approach is that the ith address bit interacts
with 2i spatial modes in one “operation”. This
is the crux: finding a mechanism to enact such a
large number of interactions passively, with error
scaling much less than 2i, seems difficult if not
impossible.
10.3
Phase Gate Fanout
[51] describe another quantum fanout system,
shown in Figure 10. This system translates each
address qubit into a photon in one of two spa-
tial modes (based on |0⟩or |1⟩in the address
qubit, shown as red horizontal beams in Fig-
ure 10).
Each of these 2 lg N spatial address
modes couples to N phase-control qubits (the up-
per blue transmons in Figure 10), so that the
phase-control qubits change state when there is
a photon in this spatial address mode.
Each phase-control qubit also couples to a an-
other optical mode, which we’ll call a transfer
mode (the vertical green beams in Figure 10),
such that there are N transfer modes, each cou-
pled to lg N phase-control qubits.
The cou-
pling is such that if the phase-control qubit is
in its |1⟩state, it adds a phase to the transfer
mode. This two-mode coupling is similar to the
recently experimentally-realized photon transis-
tor in [111].
The net effect of all this is that if the address
is |j⟩, then the ith transfer mode gains a phase
of eijφ0 for some constant φ0.
For readout, we have another collection of N
memory qubits (the bottom two rows of trans-
mons in Figure 10), each coupled to a differ-
ent transfer mode, so that the jth memory
qubit interacts with the transfer mode only when
the transfer mode has a phase of eijφ0.
Thus,
the memory qubit changes state depending on
whether the transfer mode is in resonance. For
the final readout, we use another optical readout
mode (the yellow beams in Figure 10), which in-
teracts with all memory qubits, and picks up a
phase for each one that is active. This means we
will actually need 2N memory qubits and 2 read-
out modes, so that which readout mode gains a
phase will encode the binary result of the mem-
ory lookup.
There are a number of practical issues with this
scheme.
The foremost issue is the narrowness of the res-
onance of the memory qubits. [51] note that there
will need to be N different resonant phases, and
analyze the width of a Fabry-Perot cavity’s res-
onance and conclude that if the transmissitivity
of the beamsplitters in the cavity is O(1/N), the
width of resonant phases is also O(1/N). How-
ever, this does not address the need to fabricate
each cavity, where the resonant phase must be
constructed with O(1/N) precision as well. For
a Fabry-Perot cavity, this would mean O(1/N)
precision in the physical distance between the
mirrors.
Second, each address mode must interact with
N qubits.
Modelled with a Jaynes-Cummings
Hamiltonian, every excited qubit means a re-
duced photon number in the address mode. If
not all qubits are excited, we will end up with
some superposition where only a small portion of
the total amplitude corresponds to states where
the right qubits are excited to properly perform
the memory access. Thus, we need all qubits to
be excited, meaning the photon number of each
address mode must be Ω(N).
In addition to forcing us to use Ω(N log N) en-
ergy per QRAM access, we must also provide this
energy to the address modes in such a way that,
for each address qubit, we do not learn which of
the two address modes took this energy. If we
learned this, it effectively measures the address
qubit. The quantum router of [29] might suffice.
This QRAM may not even be passive, in fact.
To excite the memory qubits, we do not want
to activate a new pulse – which requires Ω(N)
interventions and Ω(N) energy – but rather we
want the memory qubits to reside in an optical
cavity that maintains some electric field. Con-
sider a back-of-the-envelope analysis of the losses
of the optical cavities. If each cavity has qual-
ity factor Q and resonant frequency f, the frac-
tion of energy lost per unit time is proportional
to Nf/Q, since there are N cavities.
Modern
“ultra-high” quality factors are on the order of
109 [75], about the same scale as the frequency
(in hertz) of microwaves. Thus, to maintain the
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
36

--- PAGE 37 ---
QRAM for more than a few seconds requires ei-
ther enormous optical cavities (to increase the
resonant frequency) or spectacular improvements
in optical cavity quality factors. In either case,
if these improvements do not keep pace with the
increase in the number of memory bits, the total
energy loss quickly becomes enormous.
Finally, each readout mode interacts with N
qubits. If our error model permits some probabil-
ity ϵ of adding the wrong phase from each mem-
ory qubit (e.g., the probability from measuring
after interacting with that memory qubit), then
we need ϵ to be at most O(1/N), or the memory
readout will fail.
Unlike [51], the arrangment of phase-control
qubits in Figure 10 means that for each address,
only one cavity has all n phase-control qubits ex-
cited. Potentially one could engineer each phase-
control qubit to contribute 1/n of the necessary
phase to bring the transfer mode into resonance.
If so, the precision of the resonator might only
need to be O(1/ log N). However, given the read-
out method, any leakage from the resonators will
contribute directly to readout error (if leakage
excites the incorrect memory qubit, the readout
detects this). Hence, the transfer modes may still
need O(1/N) precision.
10.4
Derangement Codes
[58] proposes error correction based on code
switching,
which we summarize and slightly
tweak here.
We start by imagining a no-op state |nop⟩, such
that not only is |nop⟩invariant under UQRAM,
the internal quantum state of the QRAM nodes
are also invariant when we input |nop⟩. As an ex-
ample for bucket-brigade QRAM, we could use an
ancilla flag qubit which controls the production
of the input photons from the address qubits. If
this flag is set to 0, no input photons are gener-
ated and nothing enters the QRAM device.
Then we consider the circuit shown in Fig-
ure 11. This has m devices to access the same
table T. It generates a superposition of m dif-
ferent states, indexing which QRAM device to
shuffle our real query into (the query is |ϕ⟩=
P
i αi |i⟩|0⟩), while sending |nop⟩states to all the
other devices. We then apply all the QRACM de-
vices, un-shuffle the state, and measure the shuf-
fle controls in the Hadamard basis.
Measuring all zeros in the shuffle controls
means the states that went out came back to the
registers they started in, enforcing a “sameness”
among the queries between different QRAM de-
vices.
If the errors are independent, then this
suppresses errors, since it’s unlikely for the same
error to occur in all QRAM devices at the same
time.
[58] proposes compressing this to use only one
QRAM device by sequentially controlling swaps,
so that only one of m applications of the QRAM
applies to the real query state. Since this error
correction method only works for uncorrelated
errors, it fails for bucket-brigade QRAM. Specifi-
cally, if an error occurs at some point in the rout-
ing nodes, that error will persist between queries
(unless the routing nodes are reset, which creates
an Ω(N) cost as discussed previously). Thus, on
average half of all errors will be identical between
queries, rendering the error suppression ineffec-
tive.
Expanding their idea to a wide, parallel repe-
tition increases hardware overhead by a factor of
m, but we imagine m ≪N, otherwise the error
suppression scheme – which requires Ω(m log N)
gates for the shuffles alone – will start to ap-
proach the cost of a circuit QRAM access.
The overall effect of this is a “heralded” QRAM
access, where if we measure all zeros in the con-
trol qubits, we know that the infidelity has been
suppressed to 1/m of the physical error rate
(see [58, Chapter 4] for proof), but the probabil-
ity p of measuring all-zero is approximately equal
to the original physical infidelity.
This means
that for an algorithm to have a reasonable prob-
ability of success, it must be limited to O(
1
1−p)
QRAM queries. Recalling the applications from
Section 3, this forbids database QAA.
Finally, the code switching process raises some
issues. Imagine Figure 11 in the surface code. We
can attempt to limit the time when a qubit is out-
side of the surface code to the smallest possible,
but even a brief period without error correction
could spell disaster for a resource-intensive algo-
rithm.
10.5
Two-Level Quantum Walkers
A recent proposal for ballistic quantum compu-
tation imagines “walkers” (e.g., fermions) prop-
agating along a waveguide [6, 7]. Each walker is
a two-level quantum system, but they also use a
dual-rail encoding. A special “roundabout gate”
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
37

--- PAGE 38 ---
|nop⟩|0⟩
×
. . .
. . .
|nop⟩|0⟩
×
N−1
P
i=0
αi |i⟩|0⟩
×
|0⟩⊗lg m
H
UQRACM(T)
UQRACM(T)
. . .
UQRACM(T)
×
×
×
. . .
H
|nop⟩|0⟩
|nop⟩|0⟩
. . .
N−1
P
i=0
αi |i⟩|Ti⟩
Figure 11: QRACM with heralded error mitigation, adapted from [58]. Shaded regions and thicker wires indicate error
corrected qubits and operations, and red rectangles on the border indicate decoding and re-encoding. The controlled
swaps indicate that, based on the lg m control qubits, the last register is swapped to one of the intermediate registers.
The states shown at the top are the states if no errors occur, in which case the measurement result is all 0.
can switch between these encodings by rotating
|0⟩states of the walker clockwise, and |1⟩states
counterclockwise.
Combined with single qubit
rotations on each walker (such as magnetic fields
if the walkers are fermions), they construct a uni-
versal, ballistic gate set.
In [7] they use these
gates to construct QRAM. They route each ad-
dress walker through a binary tree, with CNOT
gates between each edge in the tree to perform
the routing.
If the underlying ballistic computation were
built, then this would work as QRAM; however,
such a technology faces all the issues we discuss in
Section 6. In fact, their proposal can construct a
ballistic version of any circuit, which would be a
powerful and revolutionary quantum technology.
To function properly, the walkers must transi-
tion correctly at the roundabout gates, and [6]
computes the probability of this transition in
terms of the momentum of the wave packets. If
the momentum differs from the target momen-
tum by ϵ, the transition probability scales as 1 −
Ω(ϵ2). Keeping the momentum of a wavepacket
constrained requires a broader wavepacket, and
an exponentially precise momentum in their sys-
tem requires an exponentially wide wavepacket.
Thus, their proposed system needs improvement
to accommodate exponential-sized circuits.
However, it may be that the error rates of their
QRAM access scale like the bucket-brigade, and
the momentum precision only needs to be loga-
rithmic in the memory size. In this case the quan-
tum walkers could act as a specialized QRAM
module, but more work must be done to clarify
the error rates and to avoid the issues we have
discussed in the interfaces between the quantum
walkers and the rest of a fault-tolerant computa-
tion.
11
Discussion
Large scale, high quality QRAM which is cheap
to use is unlikely.
It would require passively-
corrected quantum memory and highly complex,
high-fidelity ballistic computation.
We argued
in Section 6 and Section 7 that these are much
stronger assumptions about quantum computing
hardware than general large-scale, fault-tolerant
quantum computing. Even if those assumptions
come true, QRAM may still be difficult: build-
ing a ballistic computation is complicated (e.g.
Theorem 6.1) and it may not interact well with
the rest of a fault-tolerant quantum computation
(Theorem 7.1).
Indeed, we could find no pro-
posed hardware-QRAM technology that was not
implicitly active or required unreasonably low er-
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
38

--- PAGE 39 ---
ror rates (Section 9,Section 10).
All of that said, we cannot prove that cheap
QRAM will not be possible. However, many pow-
erful computing devices (say, a polynomial time
SAT-solver) are not provably impossible, but we
do not assume they will be built. Our claim is
that cheap QRAM should be considered infeasi-
ble until shown otherwise, instead of the reverse.
While classical RAM appears to set a precedent
for such devices, we argued in Section 8 that this
is an inappropriate comparison: QRAM is more
difficult relative to other quantum computations,
than classical RAM is difficult relative to classical
computation.
Despite these critiques, QRAM will likely be a
crucial tool for quantum algorithms. In a circuit
model, QRAM has a linear gate cost (regardless
of depth), but optimized circuits allow it to help
with quantum chemistry and some cryptographic
attacks (Section 5). We encourage readers to con-
sider circuit QRAM for their algorithms, and use
one of the optimized circuits we referenced.
We leave here a summary of some open ques-
tions we raised in this work:
1. With the favourable error scaling of bucket-
brigade QRACM, can it be more effective
than other methods in a surface code, espe-
cially for cryptographic attacks?
2. If we correct only some of the nodes in
a bucket-brigade QRAM, can this suppress
enough noise for practical purposes?
3. Can Theorem 5.2 and Theorem 7.1 extend to
account for measurement feedback, and can
the latter extend to data-specific distillation
processes?
4. How should we model the errors and the
costs of construction and use of large-scale
Hamiltonians for ballistic computations?
5. Are
there
codes
for
which
QRAM
is
transversal, or can otherwise be applied di-
rectly to logical states?
6. Can
we
fix
the
scaling
issues
of
the
transmon-based bucket-brigade memory of
[29]?
7. How much noise can fault-tolerant quantum
linear algebra tolerate in the QRAM access,
and could bucket-brigade QRAM reach that
level?
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank John Schanck for many fruitful dis-
cussions and providing many of these arguments;
Simon C. Benjamin, Bal´ınt Koczor, Sam McAr-
dle, Shouvanik Chakrabarti, Dylan Herman, Yue
Sun, Patrick Rebentrost, Matteo Votto, and an
anonymous reviewer for helpful comments; and
Romy Minko, Ryan Mann, Oliver Brown, and
Christian Majenz for valiant attempts to general-
ize Theorem C.2. S.J. was funded by the Univer-
sity of Oxford Clarendon fund, and acknowledges
the support of the Natural Sciences and Engi-
neering Research Council (NSERC), funding ref-
erence number RGPIN-2024-03996. A.G.R. was
funded by a JPMorgan Chase Global Technol-
ogy Applied Research PhD Fellowship and the
SEEQA project (EP/Y004655/1).
DISCLAIMER
This research was funded in part by JPMorgan
Chase & Co. Any views or opinions expressed
herein are solely those of the authors listed, and
may differ from the views and opinions expressed
by JPMorgan Chase & Co. or its affiliates. This
material is not a product of the Research De-
partment of J.P. Morgan Securities LLC. This
material should not be construed as an individ-
ual recommendation for any particular client and
is not intended as a recommendation of particu-
lar securities, financial instruments or strategies
for a particular client.
This material does not
constitute a solicitation or offer in any jurisdic-
tion.
References
[1] Scott Aaronson. Read the fine print. Na-
ture Physics, 11(4):291–293, April 2015.
DOI: 10.1038/nphys3272.
[2] Martin R. Albrecht and Yixin Shen. Quan-
tum augmented dual attack.
Cryptology
ePrint Archive, Paper 2022/656, 2022.
[3] Martin R. Albrecht, Vlad Gheorghiu, Ea-
monn W. Postlethwaite,
and John M.
Schanck.
Estimating quantum speedups
for lattice sieves.
In Shiho Moriai and
Huaxiong
Wang,
editors,
Advances
in
Cryptology – ASIACRYPT 2020, pages
583–613, Cham, 2020. Springer Interna-
tional Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-64834-
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
39

--- PAGE 40 ---
3.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-64834-3˙20.
[4] AMD.
AMD instinct™MI250X accelera-
tor, 2022.
URL https://www.amd.com/
en/products/server-accelerators/
instinct-mi250x.
[5] Srinivasan Arunachalam, Vlad Gheorghiu,
Tomas Jochym-O’Connor, Michele Mosca,
and Priyaa Varshinee Srinivasan.
On
the robustness of bucket brigade quan-
tum RAM.
New Journal of Physics,
17(12):123010,
December 2015.
DOI:
10.1088/1367-2630/17/12/123010.
[6] Ryo
Asaka,
Kazumitsu
Sakai,
and
Ryoko Yahagi.
Quantum random access
memory via quantum walk.
Quantum
Science
and
Technology,
6(3):035004,
2021. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1088/2058-
9565/abf484.
[7] Ryo Asaka, Kazumitsu Sakai, and Ryoko
Yahagi. Two-level quantum walkers on di-
rected graphs. ii. application to quantum
random access memory.
Phys. Rev. A,
107:022416, Feb 2023. DOI: 10.1103/Phys-
RevA.107.022416.
[8] Ryan Babbush, Craig Gidney, Dominic W.
Berry, Nathan Wiebe, Jarrod McClean,
Alexandru Paler, Austin Fowler, and Hart-
mut Neven. Encoding electronic spectra in
quantum circuits with linear t complexity.
Phys. Rev. X, 8:041015, Oct 2018.
DOI:
10.1103/PhysRevX.8.041015.
[9] Ryan
Babbush,
Jarrod
R.
McClean,
Michael
Newman,
Craig
Gidney,
Ser-
gio Boixo, and Hartmut Neven.
Focus
beyond
quadratic
speedups
for
error-
corrected
quantum
advantage.
PRX
Quantum,
2:010103,
Mar 2021.
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1103/PRXQuantum.2.010103.
[10] Ryan
Babbush,
Jarrod
R
McClean,
Michael Newman, Craig Gidney, Sergio
Boixo, and Hartmut Neven. Focus beyond
quadratic
speedups
for
error-corrected
quantum advantage. PRX Quantum, 2(1):
010103, 2021.
[11] Ainesh
Bakshi
and
Ewin
Tang.
An
Improved
Classical
Singular
Value
Transformation
for
Quantum
Machine
Learning,
pages
2398–2453.
DOI:
10.1137/1.9781611977912.86.
[12] Gustavo Banegas,
Daniel J. Bernstein,
Iggy Van Hoof, and Tanja Lange. Concrete
quantum cryptanalysis of binary elliptic
curves.
IACR Transactions on Crypto-
graphic Hardware and Embedded Systems,
pages 451–472, December 2020.
DOI:
10.46586/tches.v2021.i1.451-472.
[13] Robert Beals,
Stephen Brierley,
Oliver
Gray, Aram W. Harrow, Samuel Kutin,
Noah Linden, Dan Shepherd, and Mark
Stather.
Efficient distributed quantum
computing.
Proceedings of the Royal So-
ciety A: Mathematical, Physical and Engi-
neering Sciences, 469(2153):20120686, May
2013. DOI: 10.1098/rspa.2012.0686.
[14] Akrem Benatia, Weixing Ji, Yizhuo Wang,
and Feng Shi. Sparse matrix partitioning
for optimizing SpMV on CPU-GPU hetero-
geneous platforms. The International Jour-
nal of High Performance Computing Appli-
cations, 34(1):66–80, November 2019. DOI:
10.1177/1094342019886628.
[15] D. J. Bernstein. Circuits for integer factor-
ization: a proposal, 2001. https://cr.yp.
to/papers.html#nfscircuit.
[16] D. J. Bernstein.
Cost analysis of hash
collisions: Will quantum computers make
sharcs obsolete?
Workshop Record of
SHARCS’09: Special-purpose Hardware for
Attacking Cryptographic Systems, 2009.
[17] Daniel J. Bernstein and Tanja Lange. Non-
uniform cracks in the concrete: The power
of free precomputation. In Kazue Sako and
Palash Sarkar, editors, Advances in Cryp-
tology - ASIACRYPT 2013, pages 321–
340, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-642-42045-
0.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
642-42045-0˙17.
[18] Daniel J. Bernstein, Stacey Jeffery, Tanja
Lange, and Alexander Meurer.
Quan-
tum algorithms for the subset-sum prob-
lem.
In
Philippe
Gaborit,
editor,
Post-Quantum Cryptography,
pages 16–
33,
Berlin,
Heidelberg,
2013. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-642-38616-
9.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
642-38616-9˙2.
[19] Dominic W. Berry, Craig Gidney, Mario
Motta, Jarrod R. McClean, and Ryan Bab-
bush.
Qubitization of Arbitrary Basis
Quantum Chemistry Leveraging Sparsity
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
40

--- PAGE 41 ---
and Low Rank Factorization.
Quantum,
3:208, December 2019.
ISSN 2521-327X.
DOI: 10.22331/q-2019-12-02-208.
[20] Mihir
K.
Bhaskar,
Stuart
Hadfield,
Anargyros
Papageorgiou,
and
Iasonas
Petras.
Quantum algorithms and cir-
cuits for scientific computing.
Quan-
tum
Info.
Comput.,
16(3–4):197–236,
March 2016.
ISSN 1533-7146.
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.26421/qic16.3-4-2.
[21] Jacob
Biamonte,
Peter
Wittek,
Nicola
Pancotti,
Patrick
Rebentrost,
Nathan
Wiebe,
and
Seth
Lloyd.
Quantum
machine
learning.
Na-
ture,
549(7671):195–202,
2017.
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature23474.
[22] G. Bilardi and F.P. Preparata.
Hori-
zons of parallel computation.
Journal of
Parallel and Distributed Computing, 27(2):
172–182, 1995.
ISSN 0743-7315.
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1006/jpdc.1995.1080.
[23] Xavier Bonnetain and Andr´e Schrottenlo-
her. Quantum security analysis of CSIDH.
In Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT
2020,
pages 493–522. Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, 2020. DOI: 10.1007/978-
3-030-45724-2˙17.
[24] Xavier Bonnetain, Andr´e Chailloux, Andr´e
Schrottenloher, and Yixin Shen.
Find-
ing many collisions via reusable quantum
walks: Application to lattice sieving.
In
Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT
2023: 42nd Annual International Confer-
ence on the Theory and Applications of
Cryptographic Techniques, Lyon, France,
April 23-27, 2023, Proceedings, Part V,
page 221–251, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2023.
Springer-Verlag.
ISBN 978-3-031-30588-
7.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
031-30589-4˙8.
[25] Gilles Brassard, Peter Høyer, and Alain
Tapp.
Quantum cryptanalysis of hash
and claw-free functions.
ACM SIGACT
News,
28(2):14–19,
June 1997.
DOI:
10.1145/261342.261346.
[26] Gilles
Brassard,
Peter
Høyer,
Michele
Mosca, and Alain Tapp. Quantum ampli-
tude amplification and estimation. Quan-
tum Computation and Information, page
53–74, 2002.
ISSN 0271-4132.
DOI:
10.1090/conm/305/05215.
URL http://
dx.doi.org/10.1090/conm/305/05215.
[27] Benjamin J. Brown, Daniel Loss, Jian-
nis K. Pachos, Chris N. Self, and James R.
Wootton.
Quantum
memories
at
fi-
nite temperature.
Reviews of Modern
Physics, 88(4), November 2016.
DOI:
10.1103/revmodphys.88.045005.
[28] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ry-
der, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan,
Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan,
Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-
Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan,
Rewon
Child,
Aditya
Ramesh,
Daniel
Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris
Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack
Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and
Dario Amodei. Language models are few-
shot learners.
In H. Larochelle, M. Ran-
zato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin,
editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing
Systems,
volume
33,
pages
1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
[29] Arnau Sala Cadellans. A transmon based
quantum switch for a quantum random ac-
cess memory. Master’s thesis, Leiden Uni-
versity Faculty of Science, Leiden, Nether-
lands, 2015.
[30] Yu Cai, Saugata Ghose, Erich F. Haratsch,
Yixin Luo, and Onur Mutlu. Error char-
acterization, mitigation, and recovery in
flash-memory-based solid-state drives. Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE, 105(9):1666–1704,
2017. DOI: 10.1109/JPROC.2017.2713127.
[31] Aaron Carroll and Gernot Heiser. An anal-
ysis of power consumption in a smartphone.
In Proceedings of the 2010 USENIX Con-
ference on USENIX Annual Technical Con-
ference, USENIXATC’10, page 21, USA,
2010. USENIX Association.
[32] Tore Vincent Carstens and Dirk Oliver
Theis.
Note on (active-)qram-style data
access as a quantum circuit, 2018.
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.10759.
[33] Andr´e
Chailloux
and
Johanna
Loyer.
Lattice
sieving
via
quantum
random
walks.
In Mehdi Tibouchi and Huaxiong
Wang, editors, Advances in Cryptology –
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
41

--- PAGE 42 ---
ASIACRYPT 2021, pages 63–91, Cham,
2021.
Springer
International
Publish-
ing.
ISBN 978-3-030-92068-5.
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92068-
5˙3.
[34] Jorge
Ch´avez-Saab,
Jes´us-Javier
Chi-
Dom´ınguez,
Samuel Jaques,
and Fran-
cisco Rodr´ıguez-Henr´ıquez. The SQALE of
CSIDH: sublinear v´elu quantum-resistant
isogeny action with low exponents. Jour-
nal of Cryptographic Engineering, August
2021. DOI: 10.1007/s13389-021-00271-w.
[35] Kevin
C.
Chen,
Wenhan
Dai,
Carlos
Errando-Herranz, Seth Lloyd, and Dirk
Englund.
Heralded quantum random ac-
cess memory in a scalable photonic in-
tegrated circuit platform.
In Confer-
ence on Lasers and Electro-Optics. Op-
tica
Publishing
Group,
2021.
DOI:
10.1364/cleo˙qels.2021.fth1p.7.
[36] Nadiia
Chepurko,
Kenneth
Clarkson,
Lior Horesh, Honghao Lin, and David
Woodruff.
Quantum-inspired algorithms
from randomized numerical linear algebra.
In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 3879–3900. PMLR, 2022.
[37] Nai-Hui
Chia,
Andr´as
Pal
Gily´en,
Tongyang
Li,
Han-Hsuan
Lin,
Ewin
Tang, and Chunhao Wang.
Sampling-
based sublinear low-rank matrix arith-
metic framework for dequantizing quan-
tum
machine
learning.
Journal
of
the
ACM,
69(5):1–72,
2022.
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3549524.
[38] Charles
Q.
Choi.
The
beating
heart
of
the
world’s
first
exascale
supercomputer.
IEEE
Spectrum,
2022.
https://spectrum.ieee.org/
frontier-exascale-supercomputer.
[39] Carlo Ciliberto, Mark Herbster, Alessan-
dro Davide Ialongo, Massimiliano Pon-
til, Andrea Rocchetto, Simone Severini,
and Leonard Wossnig. Quantum machine
learning: a classical perspective. Proceed-
ings of the Royal Society A: Mathemat-
ical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
474(2209):20170551, January 2018.
DOI:
10.1098/rspa.2017.0551.
[40] B. David Clader, Alexander M. Dalzell,
Nikitas
Stamatopoulos,
Grant
Salton,
Mario Berta, and William J. Zeng. Quan-
tum resources required to block-encode a
matrix of classical data, 2022.
[41] Tim
Dettmers,
Mike
Lewis,
Younes
Belkada,
and
Luke
Zettlemoyer.
Llm.int8(): 8-bit matrix multiplication for
transformers at scale. In Proceedings of the
36th International Conference on Neural
Information
Processing
Systems,
NIPS
’22, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2022. Curran
Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713871088.
[42] Laurent El Ghaoui. Inversion error, con-
dition number, and approximate inverses
of uncertain matrices.
Linear algebra
and its applications, 343:171–193, 2002.
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0024-
3795(01)00273-7.
[43] Richard P. Feynman. Quantum mechanical
computers. Optics News, 11(2):11–20, Feb
1985. DOI: 10.1364/ON.11.2.000011.
[44] Elias Frantar, Saleh Ashkboos, Torsten
Hoefler, and Dan Alistarh. Gptq: Accurate
post-training quantization for generative
pre-trained transformers.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.17323, 2022.
[45] Craig Gidney. Windowed quantum arith-
metic. arXiv:1905.07682, 2019.
[46] Craig Gidney. Quantum dictionaries with-
out qram. arXiv:2204.13835, 2022.
[47] Craig Gidney and Martin Eker˚a. How to
factor 2048 bit RSA integers in 8 hours us-
ing 20 million noisy qubits. Quantum, 5:
433, April 2021.
ISSN 2521-327X.
DOI:
10.22331/q-2021-04-15-433.
[48] Andr´as Gily´en,
Seth Lloyd,
and Ewin
Tang. Quantum-inspired low-rank stochas-
tic
regression
with
logarithmic
depen-
dence on the dimension.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.04909, 2018.
[49] Andr´as Gily´en, Yuan Su, Guang Hao Low,
and Nathan Wiebe.
Quantum singular
value transformation and beyond:
expo-
nential improvements for quantum matrix
arithmetics. In Proceedings of the 51st An-
nual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory
of Computing, pages 193–204, 2019. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3313276.3316366.
[50] R. Gioiosa.
Resilience for extreme scale
computing.
In Rugged Embedded Sys-
tems, pages 123–148. Elsevier, 2017. DOI:
10.1016/b978-0-12-802459-1.00005-1.
[51] Vittorio
Giovannetti,
Seth
Lloyd,
and
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
42

--- PAGE 43 ---
Lorenzo Maccone.
Architectures for a
quantum random access memory.
Phys.
Rev. A, 78:052310,
Nov 2008.
DOI:
10.1103/PhysRevA.78.052310.
[52] Vittorio
Giovannetti,
Seth
Lloyd,
and
Lorenzo Maccone.
Quantum random ac-
cess memory.
Phys. Rev. Lett.,
100:
160501, Apr 2008.
DOI: 10.1103/Phys-
RevLett.100.160501.
[53] John T. Godfrey. Binary digital computer,
U.S. Patent 3390471A, Jul. 1968.
[54] Google.
Cloud
TPU
documenta-
tion:
System
architecture,
2022.
https://cloud.google.com/tpu/docs/
system-architecture-tpu-vm.
[55] Ananth Grama, Anshul Gupta, George
Karypis, and Vipin Kumar. Introduction to
Parallel Computing. Addison Wesley, 2003.
ISBN 0-201-64865-2.
[56] J. Alex Halderman, Seth D. Schoen, Na-
dia Heninger, William Clarkson, William
Paul, Joseph A. Calandrino, Ariel J. Feld-
man, Jacob Appelbaum, and Edward W.
Felten. Lest we remember: Cold-boot at-
tacks on encryption keys. Commun. ACM,
52(5):91–98, may 2009.
ISSN 0001-0782.
DOI: 10.1145/1506409.1506429.
[57] Thomas H¨aner, Samuel Jaques, Michael
Naehrig, Martin Roetteler, and Mathias
Soeken. Improved quantum circuits for el-
liptic curve discrete logarithms.
In Post-
Quantum Cryptography,
pages 425–444.
Springer International Publishing, 2020.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-44223-1˙23.
[58] Connor T. Hann. Practicality of Quantum
Random Access Memory. PhD thesis, Yale
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences Dis-
sertations, 2021.
[59] Connor T. Hann, Gideon Lee, S.M. Girvin,
and Liang Jiang.
Resilience of quantum
random access memory to generic noise.
PRX Quantum, 2(2), April 2021.
DOI:
10.1103/prxquantum.2.020311.
[60] Aram W. Harrow, Avinatan Hassidim, and
Seth Lloyd.
Quantum algorithm for lin-
ear systems of equations. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
103:150502, Oct 2009. DOI: 10.1103/Phys-
RevLett.103.150502.
[61] Max Heiser.
Improved quantum hyper-
cone locality sensitive filtering in lattice
sieving. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
2021/1295, 2021. https://eprint.iacr.
org/2021/1295.
[62] Fang-Yu Hong, Yang Xiang, Zhi-Yan Zhu,
Li-zhen Jiang, and Liang-neng Wu.
Ro-
bust quantum random access memory.
Phys. Rev. A, 86:010306, Jul 2012. DOI:
10.1103/PhysRevA.86.010306.
[63] Samuel Jaques and John M. Schanck.
Quantum cryptanalysis in the RAM model:
Claw-finding attacks on SIKE. In Alexan-
dra Boldyreva and Daniele Micciancio, ed-
itors, Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO
2019 - 39th Annual International Cryp-
tology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA,
USA, August 18-22, 2019, Proceedings,
Part I, volume 11692 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 32–61. Springer,
2019.
DOI:
10.1007/978-3-030-26948-
7“˙2.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-26948-7_2.
[64] N. Jiang, Y.-F. Pu, W. Chang, C. Li,
S. Zhang, and L.-M. Duan.
Experimen-
tal realization of 105-qubit random ac-
cess quantum memory.
npj Quantum
Information,
5(1),
April 2019.
DOI:
10.1038/s41534-019-0144-0.
[65] Jung Jun Park, Kyunghyun Baek, M S
Kim, Hyunchul Nha, Jaewan Kim, and
Jeongho Bang.
T-depth-optimized quan-
tum search with quantum data-access ma-
chine. Quantum Science and Technology, 9
(1):015011, nov 2023. DOI: 10.1088/2058-
9565/ad04e5. URL https://doi.org/10.
1088/2058-9565/ad04e5.
[66] Ghazal Kachigar and Jean-Pierre Tillich.
Quantum information set decoding algo-
rithms, 2017. URL arXiv:1703.00263.
[67] Dhiraj Kalamkar,
Dheevatsa Mudigere,
Naveen
Mellempudi,
Dipankar
Das,
Kunal
Banerjee,
Sasikanth
Avancha,
Dharma Teja Vooturi, Nataraj Jammala-
madaka,
Jianyu
Huang,
Hector
Yuen,
et al. A study of bfloat16 for deep learning
training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.12322,
2019.
[68] Ravindran Kannan and Santosh Vempala.
Randomized algorithms in numerical linear
algebra. Acta Numerica, 26:95–135, 2017.
DOI: 10.1017/S0962492917000058.
[69] Iordanis Kerenidis and Anupam Prakash.
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
43

--- PAGE 44 ---
Quantum recommendation systems. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1603.08675, 2016.
[70] Elena Kirshanova.
Improved quantum
information
set
decoding.
In
Tanja
Lange and Rainer Steinwandt,
editors,
Post-Quantum Cryptography, pages 507–
527,
Cham,
2018.
Springer
Interna-
tional Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-79063-
3.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-79063-3˙24.
[71] A. Yu. Kitaev, A. Shen, and M. N. Vya-
lyi.
Classical and Quantum Computa-
tion.
American Mathematical Society,
USA, 2002.
ISBN 082182161X.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/gsm/047/31.
[72] G. Kuperberg.
Another subexponential-
time quantum algorithm for the dihe-
dral
hidden
subgroup
problem.
In
TQC
2013,
LIPIcs
22,
pages
20–34,
2013. DOI: 10.4230/LIPIcs.TQC.2013.20.
URL https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.
TQC.2013.20.
[73] Thijs Laarhoven. Sieving for closest lattice
vectors (with preprocessing).
In Roberto
Avanzi and Howard Heys, editors, Selected
Areas in Cryptography – SAC 2016, pages
523–542, Cham, 2017. Springer Interna-
tional Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-69453-
5.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-69453-5˙28.
[74] Thijs Laarhoven, Michele Mosca, and Joop
van de Pol.
Finding shortest lattice vec-
tors faster using quantum search. Designs,
Codes and Cryptography, 77(2-3):375–400,
April 2015. DOI: 10.1007/s10623-015-0067-
5.
[75] C. Lecaplain,
C. Javerzac-Galy,
M. L.
Gorodetsky, and T. J. Kippenberg. Mid-
infrared ultra-high-q resonators based on
fluoride crystalline materials. Nature Com-
munications, 7(1), November 2016. DOI:
10.1038/ncomms13383.
[76] Lin Lin. Lecture notes on quantum algo-
rithms for scientific computation.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2201.08309, 2022.
[77] Junyu Liu, Minzhao Liu, Jin-Peng Liu,
Ziyu Ye, Yunfei Wang, Yuri Alexeev, Jens
Eisert, and Liang Jiang. Towards provably
efficient quantum algorithms for large-scale
machine-learning models. Nature Commu-
nications, 15(1), January 2024. ISSN 2041-
1723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-43957-x.
[78] Guang Hao Low and Isaac L Chuang.
Hamiltonian
simulation
by
qubitiza-
tion.
Quantum,
3:163,
2019.
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2019-07-12-
163.
[79] Guang Hao Low, Vadym Kliuchnikov, and
Luke Schaeffer.
Trading T gates for
dirty qubits in state preparation and uni-
tary synthesis, June 2024.
ISSN 2521-
327X. URL https://doi.org/10.22331/
q-2024-06-17-1375.
[80] John M Martyn,
Zane M Rossi,
An-
drew
K
Tan,
and
Isaac
L
Chuang.
Grand unification of quantum algorithms.
PRX Quantum, 2(4):040203, 2021.
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1103/PRXQuantum.2.040203.
[81] Olivia Di Matteo, Vlad Gheorghiu, and
Michele Mosca. Fault-tolerant resource es-
timation of quantum random-access mem-
ories.
IEEE
Transactions
on
Quan-
tum Engineering,
1:1–13,
2020.
DOI:
10.1109/TQE.2020.2965803.
[82] Vidyabhushan Mohan. Modelling the phys-
ical characteristics of NAND flash mem-
ory.
PhD thesis, School of Engineering
and Applied Science, University of Vir-
ginia, 2010.
[83] E. S. Moiseev and S. A. Moiseev. Time-bin
quantum RAM.
Journal of Modern Op-
tics, 63(20):2081–2092, May 2016.
DOI:
10.1080/09500340.2016.1182222.
[84] Dustin Moody. Status report on the third
round of the NIST post-quantum cryptog-
raphy standardization process.
Technical
report, National Institute of Standards and
Technology, 2022.
[85] Michele Mosca and Marco Piani. Quantum
threat timeline report 2020. Technical re-
port, Global Risk Institute, 2021.
[86] Michael Newman and Yaoyun Shi. Limita-
tions on transversal computation through
quantum homomorphic encryption. Quan-
tum Info. Comput.,
18(11–12):927–948,
sep
2018.
ISSN
1533-7146.
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.26421/qic18.11-12-3.
[87] Murphy Yuezhen Niu, Alexander Zlokapa,
Michael Broughton, Sergio Boixo, Masoud
Mohseni, Vadim Smelyanskyi, and Hart-
mut Neven. Entangling quantum genera-
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
44

--- PAGE 45 ---
tive adversarial networks. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
128:220505, Jun 2022. DOI: 10.1103/Phys-
RevLett.128.220505.
[88] James O’Sullivan,
Oscar W. Kennedy,
Kamanasish Debnath, Joseph Alexander,
Christoph W. Zollitsch, Mantas ˇSim˙enas,
Akel Hashim,
Christopher N. Thomas,
Stafford Withington, Irfan Siddiqi, Klaus
Mølmer, and John J. L. Morton. Random-
access quantum memory using chirped
pulse phase encoding.
Phys. Rev. X, 12:
041014, Nov 2022.
DOI: 10.1103/Phys-
RevX.12.041014.
[89] Alexandru Paler, Oumarou Oumarou, and
Robert Basmadjian.
Parallelizing the
queries in a bucket-brigade quantum ran-
dom access memory.
Phys. Rev. A, 102:
032608, Sep 2020.
DOI: 10.1103/Phys-
RevA.102.032608.
[90] Daniel K. Park, Francesco Petruccione, and
June-Koo Kevin Rhee. Circuit-based quan-
tum random access memory for classical
data. Scientific Reports, 9(1), March 2019.
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-40439-3.
[91] Fernando Pastawski and Beni Yoshida.
Fault-tolerant logical gates in quantum
error-correcting codes. Phys. Rev. A, 91:
012305, Jan 2015.
DOI: 10.1103/Phys-
RevA.91.012305.
[92] Chris Peikert.
He gives c-sieves on the
CSIDH. In Advances in Cryptology – EU-
ROCRYPT 2020, pages 463–492. Springer
International
Publishing,
2020.
DOI:
10.1007/978-3-030-45724-2˙16.
[93] Koustubh Phalak, Junde Li, and Swaroop
Ghosh. Approximate quantum random ac-
cess memory architectures, 2022.
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.14804.
[94] Koustubh Phalak, Avimita Chatterjee, and
Swaroop Ghosh.
Quantum random ac-
cess memory for dummies.
Sensors, 23
(17),
2023.
ISSN 1424-8220.
DOI:
10.3390/s23177462.
URL https://www.
mdpi.com/1424-8220/23/17/7462.
[95] Marco Pistoia, Syed Farhan Ahmad, Ak-
shay Ajagekar, Alexander Buts, Shouvanik
Chakrabarti, Dylan Herman, Shaohan Hu,
Andrew Jena, Pierre Minssen, Pradeep
Niroula, et al.
Quantum machine learn-
ing for finance ICCAD special session
paper. In 2021 IEEE/ACM International
Conference On Computer Aided Design
(ICCAD), pages 1–9. IEEE, 2021.
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCAD51958.2021.9643469.
[96] Arthur G Rattew and B´alint Koczor.
Preparing arbitrary continuous functions in
quantum registers with logarithmic com-
plexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.00519,
2022.
[97] Patrick Rebentrost, Masoud Mohseni, and
Seth Lloyd. Quantum support vector ma-
chine for big data classification. Physical
review letters, 113(13):130503, 2014. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.130503.
[98] Oded Regev and Liron Schiff. Impossibility
of a quantum speed-up with a faulty oracle.
In Luca Aceto, Ivan Damg˚ard, Leslie Ann
Goldberg, Magn´us M. Halld´orsson, Anna
Ing´olfsd´ottir,
and
Igor
Walukiewicz,
editors,
Automata,
Languages
and
Programming,
pages
773–781,
Berlin,
Heidelberg,
2008. Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg.
ISBN 978-3-540-70575-8.
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-70575-
8˙63.
[99] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh
Saxena, Lala Lit, Jay Whang, Emily Den-
ton, Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour,
Burcu Karagol Ayan, S. Sara Mahdavi,
Raphael
Gontijo-Lopes,
Tim
Salimans,
Jonathan Ho, David J Fleet, and Moham-
mad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image
diffusion models with deep language un-
derstanding.
In Proceedings of the 36th
International Conference on Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, NIPS ’22, Red
Hook, NY, USA, 2022. Curran Associates
Inc. ISBN 9781713871088.
[100] John
M.
Schanck.
via
Twitter,
Jun
2021.
https://web.archive.
org/web/20220710183049/https:
//twitter.com/susurrusus/status/
1532131390338215937.
[101] Bianca Schroeder, Eduardo Pinheiro, and
Wolf-Dietrich Weber. Dram errors in the
wild: A large-scale field study. Commun.
ACM, 54(2):100–107, feb 2011. ISSN 0001-
0782. DOI: 10.1145/1897816.1897844.
[102] Claude. E. Shannon. The synthesis of two-
terminal switching circuits. The Bell Sys-
tem Technical Journal, 28(1):59–98, 1949.
DOI: 10.1002/j.1538-7305.1949.tb03624.x.
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
45

--- PAGE 46 ---
[103] Damien Steiger. Racing in parallel: Quan-
tum versus classical, 2016.
[104] Xiaoming Sun, Guojing Tian, Shuai Yang,
Pei Yuan, and Shengyu Zhang.
Asymp-
totically optimal circuit depth for quan-
tum state preparation and general uni-
tary synthesis.
IEEE Transactions on
Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Cir-
cuits and Systems, pages 1–1, 2023. DOI:
10.1109/TCAD.2023.3244885.
[105] Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto.
Reinforcement learning: An introduction.
MIT press, 2018.
[106] Ewin Tang.
A quantum-inspired clas-
sical algorithm for recommendation sys-
tems.
In Proceedings of the 51st annual
ACM SIGACT symposium on theory of
computing, pages 217–228, 2019.
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3313276.3316310.
[107] Seiichiro Tani. An improved claw finding
algorithm using quantum walk. In Math-
ematical Foundations of Computer Science
2007, pages 536–547. Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg, 2007.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-
74456-6˙48.
[108] Tezzaron Semiconductor, January 2004.
[109] W. Tittel,
M. Afzelius,
T. Chaneli´ere,
R.L. Cone, S. Kr¨oll, S.A. Moiseev, and
M. Sellars.
Photon-echo quantum mem-
ory in solid state systems. Laser & Pho-
tonics Reviews, 4(2):244–267, 2010. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1002/lpor.200810056.
[110] Vlatko
Vedral,
Adriano
Barenco,
and
Artur
Ekert.
Quantum
networks
for
elementary arithmetic operations.
Phys-
ical Review A, 54(1):147, 1996.
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.54.147.
[111] Zhiling Wang, Zenghui Bao, Yan Li, Yukai
Wu, Weizhou Cai, Weiting Wang, Xiyue
Han,
Jiahui Wang,
Yipu Song,
Luyan
Sun, Hongyi Zhang, and Luming Duan.
An ultra-high gain single-photon transis-
tor in the microwave regime. Nature Com-
munications, 13(1), October 2022.
DOI:
10.1038/s41467-022-33921-6.
[112] Pei Yuan and Shengyu Zhang.
Opti-
mal (controlled) quantum state prepara-
tion and improved unitary synthesis by
quantum circuits with any number of an-
cillary qubits.
Quantum, 7:956, March
2023. ISSN 2521-327X. DOI: 10.22331/q-
2023-03-20-956.
URL https://doi.org/
10.22331/q-2023-03-20-956.
[113] X. X. Yuan, J.-J. Ma, P.-Y. Hou, X.-Y.
Chang, C. Zu, and L.-M. Duan.
Experi-
mental demonstration of a quantum router.
Scientific Reports, 5(1), July 2015. DOI:
10.1038/srep12452.
[114] Xiao-Ming
Zhang,
Tongyang
Li,
and
Xiao Yuan.
Quantum state preparation
with
optimal
circuit
depth:
Imple-
mentations
and
applications.
Phys.
Rev. Lett., 129:230504, Nov 2022.
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.129.230504.
[115] Xiao-Ming Zhang, Tongyang Li, and Xiao
Yuan. Quantum state preparation with op-
timal circuit depth: Implementations and
applications. Physical Review Letters, 129
(23):230504, 2022.
[116] Darko Zivanovic, Pouya Esmaili Dokht,
Sergi Mor´e, Javier Bartolome, Paul M.
Carpenter,
Petar Radojkovi´c,
and Ed-
uard
Ayguad´e.
Dram
errors
in
the
field:
A
statistical
approach.
In
Proceedings
of
the
International
Sym-
posium on Memory Systems, MEMSYS
’19, page 69–84, New York, NY, USA,
2019.
Association
for
Computing
Ma-
chinery.
ISBN 9781450372060.
DOI:
10.1145/3357526.3357558.
A
Linear Algebra Proofs
Lemma A.1 (Optimality of Quantum Eigen-
value Transform). Any quantum algorithm im-
plementing a degree-k polynomial of a matrix H
(with the polynomial defined on the eigenvalues)
requires Ω(k) queries to OH, in general.
Proof. We prove this lower-bound by a reduc-
tion to unstructured search, in the QSVT frame-
work (as per [49]), from which the bound imme-
diately follows. We note that the result of [49]
almost immediately implies this bound, but we
present the following derivation in a format to
enhance the clarity of our discussion. First we
formally define a block-encoding.
As per [49],
an n + a-qubit unitary matrix UA is called an
(α, a, ϵ)-block encoding of the n-qubit matrix A
if
A −α(⟨0|⊗a ⊗In)UA(|0⟩⊗a ⊗In)

2 ≤ϵ.
Given an unstructured search function f(x) =
0 for all x ̸= m, and f(m) = 1 (with m be-
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
46

--- PAGE 47 ---
ing unique), specified by an Of, oracle defined
as Of |x⟩= (−1)f(x)⊕1 |x⟩(where we negate the
sign for ease of analysis), we can construct a
(1, 9, 0)-block-encoding UA of A :=
1
√
N |m⟩⟨+n|,
where |+n⟩= H⊗n |0⟩. We give a very inefficient
block encoding (in terms of the number of an-
cillas) for ease of exposition. First, we construct
a (1, 4, 0)-block-encoding of H⊗n|0⟩⟨0|H⊗n. This
can first be done by constructing a (1, 2, 0)-block-
encoding of |0⟩⟨0| = 1
2(In +(2|0⟩⟨0|−In)) (which
can be done by applying the standard sum of
block encoding lemma [49]) of an n qubit iden-
tity matrix with the standard 2|0⟩⟨0|−In unitary
from Grover search. We can then use the prod-
uct of block encodings lemma with H⊗n, |0⟩⟨0|,
and H⊗n again to get a (1, 4, 0)-block encoding
of |+n⟩⟨+n|.
We can then use the product of
block encoding with I1 ⊗Of and |+n⟩⟨+n| to
get a (1, 5, 0)-block encoding of Of|+n⟩⟨+n|. We
can then use the sum of block encodings with
|+n⟩⟨+n| and Of|+n⟩⟨+n| to get a (1, 9, 0)-block-
encoding of 1
2((Of + I)|+n⟩⟨+n|) =
1
√
N |m⟩⟨+n|,
as desired.
We can apply the polynomial approximation
of the sign function as per [49] to our block en-
coding unitary UA, giving a constant probabil-
ity of success of measuring the marked state.
They give the degree of this (odd degree) polyno-
mial as k = O(log(1/ϵ)/δ), where ϵ is an upper-
bound on the maximum deviation of the polyno-
mial approximation to the sign function in the
x ∈[−2, 2]\(−δ, δ). If we set δ =
1
√
N , then the
sign function maps our non-zero singular value to
1, while leaving the zero-valued singular values
unchanged. As a result, we can measure the an-
cilla register in the |0⟩state with ∝1−ϵ probabil-
ity, learning the result of the unstructured search
problem. If it were possible to implement this de-
gree ˜O(1/δ) degree-polynomial with fewer than
Ω(1/δ) queries to UA, we could solve unstruc-
tured search in general with fewer than Ω(
√
N)
queries to the unstructured search oracle, vio-
lating well-known lower-bounds for unstructured
search. As a consequence, any general algorithm
implementing a SVT of a degree-k polynomial of
some matrix H must use at least Ω(k) queries to
that matrix.
A polynomial implementing the sign function
applied to the eigenvalues of a block encoding
of ˜A :=
 
0
A
A†
0
!
would also solve unstructured
search in the same way (noting that the non-zero
eigenvalues of ˜A correspond to ± 1
√
N and have
associated eigenvectors
1
√
2(|0⟩1 |m⟩± |1⟩1 |+n⟩).
Thus, applying Sign( ˜A) leaves the 0 eigenvalues
unchanged, and maps the ± 1
√
N eigenvalues to
±1 (within ϵ distance). Consequently, Sign( ˜A) ≈
 
0
|m⟩⟨+n|
|+n⟩⟨m|
0
!
.
Applying Sign( ˜A) to an
initial state |1⟩|+n⟩then gives the solution to the
unstructured search problem, and so the same
bound holds for Problem 1.
Lemma A.2. Given P classical processors shar-
ing a common memory of access time O(1), a d-
sparse matrix A ∈CN×N and a vector v ∈CN,
we can compute Av with ˜O(Nd/P) time complex-
ity.
Proof. This is a standard result; see [55]. Assume
we represent A as N lists of elements (j, Aij),
where Aij are the non-zero components in row i,
and v as an N-element array. With fewer than
N processors, each processor will iterate through
a row of A. For an entry (j, Aij), it will look up
the jth element of v, multiply it by Aij and add
that to a running total. This produces one ele-
ment of Av. Each element can be computed in-
dependently, so this parallelizes perfectly. With
more than N processors, rows will have multiple
processors. The processors for row i can divide
the entries of A in that row and compute sub-
totals. To compute the full sum, they add their
sub-totals together in a tree structure; this tree
has depth O(log(P/N)).
Following the techniques of [15], we use sorting
to build matrix multiplication.
Lemma A.3. Given P parallel processors form-
ing a sorting network that can sort in time S,
multiplying an N-dimensional vector v by a d-
sparse N ×N matrix A takes time O(S+Nd/P +
lg(d)).
Proof. First the processors create d copies of v.
Each processor will store a block of A or v in lo-
cal memory, so by treating A as a block matrix,
we suppose each processor has one entry Aij of
A or vj of v. We assume there is an efficiently-
computable function fj for each column j, which
injectively maps indices k from 1 to d to the non-
zero elements of that column.
Each processor
creates a tuple (k, j, 0, Afj(k)j) for components of
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
47

--- PAGE 48 ---
A, and (k, j, vj) for components of v (each copy
of v has a distinct value of k). They will then
sort this data by the second component, then the
first. Because each column of A contains at most
d non-zero entries, this ensures each processor
with a tuple (k, j, 0, Afj(k)j) is adjacent to a tu-
ple (k, j, vj), so these two processors can compute
Afj(k)jvj and store the result in the tuple for A.
The processors can then discard the tuples for v,
and change the first component from k to fj(k).
Then they re-sort so that the rows of A are phys-
ically close (e.g., in a square of length
√
d in 2
dimensions). They then add the entries of Aijvj
for each row. Cascading these together will take
at least lg(d) sequential additions, but it will be
asymptotically less than the sorts of the full ma-
trix and vector. This produces the ith element
of Av. Another sort can send these to whatever
memory location represents the output.
Lemma A.4 (Dense Matrix-Vector Multiplica-
tion with Local Memory). A set of O(N2 log(N))
processors arranged in a 3D grid and with nearly
local connectivity, leading to a total wire-length
of ˜O(N2), can implement a matrix-vector mul-
tiplication with an N × N matrix A and an N-
dimensional vector v with O(log(N)) complexity.
Proof. Consider a grid of N ×N processors, each
with local memory, and no connections to their
nearest neighbors. Assume that each element in
A is assigned to a corresponding processor in the
grid, i.e.
the processor in the ith row and jth
column stores element Aij.
If our initial vec-
tor v is stored in a set of N data cells, using
a stack of log(N) local processors, of dimension
2×N, 4×N, ..., N ×N we can recursively spread
the elements in the vector to construct an N ×N
matrix V such that Vij = vj. The first layer in
this stack has 2 wires per layer, each of length
N/2, for a total wire-length of O(N2). The fi-
nal layer in this stack, the one that connects el-
ement Vij to element Aij in the main N × N
grid, has O(N2) wires, each of length O(1) for
a total wire length of O(N2). The middle lay-
ers in the stack similarly have a total wire length
of O(N2) (summing progressively more shorter
wires).
Thus, the main N × N processor grid
can store Aijvj with a total of O(N2 log N) an-
cillary local processors with a total wire length
of O(N2 log N).
We can then repeat this pro-
cess of spreading out the elements of v in reverse,
adding another stack of log N processors of size
N × N, N × N/2, ..., N × 2, N × 1. We then add
elements in adjacent cells, sending them to the
cell in the layer above, building up the sum of
products of the appropriate matrix and vector
element.
This produces the output vector Av,
where the ith row stores PN
j=1 Aijvj, with a total
wire-length of O(N2 log N), and with a total of
O(N2 log N) processors.
B
Proof of Theorem 5.1
We
start
by
defining
the
set
of
circuits
C(W, D, G, g, k) to be all circuits on W qubits,
of circuit depth D, using G gates from a set of
size g with fanin at most k. Here we assume all
gates have depth 1 and we count circuits based on
the arrangement of gates, not by function. De-
fine a “circuit” as a function that takes as input
a pair of (qubit,time step) and returns as output
the particular gate applied to that qubit at that
time step.
If two circuits have a different effect on quan-
tum states, they must use different gates, and
thus will be distinct circuits by this definition.
This definition overcounts circuits, since equiv-
alent circuits are counted twice, but we want to
upper bound the number of circuits so this is fine.
Proposition
B.1.
Under
this
notation,
|C(W, D, G, g, k)|
≤
|C(W, D, min{kG, DW}, Wg, 1)|.
Proof. Let U be an ℓ-qubit gate in the gate
set of C(W, D, g, k).
We can define ℓdis-
tinct single-qubit gates U1, . . . , Uℓfrom U, ex-
panding the total number of gates from g to
gk, and and then further define W/ℓmulti-
ples of each of these single qubit gates, i.e.,
U(1)
1 , . . . , U(1)
ℓ
, . . . , U(m)
1
, . . . , U(m)
ℓ
where m
=
⌊W/ℓ⌋. This gives at most W single-qubit gates
from U, so the total number of single-qubit gates
defined in this way is at most Wg.
We
now
define
an
injective
function
from
C(W, D, G, g, k)
to
C(W, D, min{kG, DW}, Wg, 1).
For
each
circuit, at each timestep we take all ℓ-qubit gates
U(1), . . . U(m) (we know there are fewer tham
m = ⌊W/ℓ⌋gates of fanin ℓin one timestep,
because there aren’t enough qubits for more!)
and decompose each into U(i)
1 , . . . , U(i)
ℓ, such
that the qubit mapped to the jth input of the
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
48

--- PAGE 49 ---
ith gate is given gate U(i)
j .
This increases the
total number of gates by at most a factor of k,
and cannot increase the number of gates above
DW.
For example, a CNOT would split into two
gates, a “target” gate and a “control” gate, and
if these are reversed, the circuit is different (by
our counting).
To show injectivity, suppose two circuits C1
and C2 in C(W, D, G, g, k) map to the same cir-
cuit in C(W, D, kG, gW, 1).
Let U be any gate
in C1; suppose it applies to ℓqubits q1, . . . , qℓ
in time step t. This means there is some i such
that the image circuit has U(i)
1 , . . . , U(i)
ℓ
applied
to q1, . . . , qℓin time step t. By construction of
our function, this means there must be some gate
in C2 of the same type as G which is also ap-
plied to those same qubits, in the same order, in
time step t. Repeating for all gates shows that
C1 = C2.
Proposition
B.2.
In
the
same
notation,
|C(W, D, G, g, 1)| ≤
 DW
G
gG.
Proof. We can straightforwardly count:
There
are DW possible “slots” for each gate, depending
on which qubit and which time step. We choose
G slots, and for each one, we select one of the g
gates.
Lemma
B.3.
|C(W, D, G, g, k)|
≤
 DW
min{kG,DW}
(Wg)G.
Proof. We combine Proposition B.1 and Propo-
sition B.2 to obtain the result.
C
Proof of No Distillation
There are two components of the proof: First, we
argue that with only d inputs in the QRACM, we
can always find some indices which are “under-
represented”, i.e., very little of the amplitude of
the input state is concentrated on those indices.
Lemma C.1. Let H1, . . . , Hd be any collec-
tion of finite-dimensional Hilbert spaces, and let
HQRACM be the space that UQRACM acts on for
tables of size N. Let ρ1, . . . , ρd be any collection
of states, each in B(Hi ⊗HQRACM), i.e., part
of the state is in the input space for a QRACM
gate. Then there exists some set of ℓindices such
that for any two tables T and T ′ differing only in
those ℓindices, if we define
δi :=
UQRACM(T)(ρi) −UQRACM(T ′)(ρi)

1
(16)
(i.e., the trace distance, with an implicit identity
channel on Hi) then
d
X
i=1
δi ≤d
s
2ℓ
N .
(17)
This is more general than necessary: we only
need ℓ= 1 to prove our main theorem.
Proof. Because we care about the application of
a perfect QRACM gate, we will purify each of
these states, so we consider some purification of
ρi:
|ψi⟩=
N−1
X
j=0
X
b∈{0,1}
αijb |ψijb⟩|j⟩|b⟩
(18)
where we have expressed the input space to the
QRACM gate in the computational basis. Here
|ψijb⟩is in Hi ⊗Hp, where Hp is the space nec-
essary to purify ρi. We see that UQRACM(T) =
P
j,b |j⟩⟨j | ⊗|b ⊕T[j]⟩⟨b|, so that
UQRACM(T ′)†UQRACM(T)
=
X
j:T ′[j]=T[j]
|j⟩⟨j | ⊗I2 +
X
j:T ′[j]̸=T[j]
|j⟩⟨j | ⊗X
(19)
where X is the Pauli X. This implies that
⟨ψi|UQRACM(T ′)†UQRACM(T) |ψi⟩
(20)
=
X
j:T[j]=T ′[j],b∈{0,1}
|αijb|2+
(21)
X
j:T[j]̸=T ′[j]
αij0αij1 ⟨ψij0| ψij1⟩+ αij1αij0 ⟨ψij1| ψij0⟩
(22)
≥1 −


X
j:T[j]̸=T ′[j]
|αij0|2 + |αij1|2
+ αij0αij1 + αij1αij0


(23)
≥1 −2
X
j:T[j]̸=T ′[j]
|αij0|2 + |αij1|2
(24)
Since UQRACM(T ′) does not act on the purify
space, it commutes with tracing out the purifying
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
49

--- PAGE 50 ---
space, and partial trace can only decrease trace
distance, we have that the trace distance between
the states after applying QRACM to the two dif-
ferent tables is at most
δi ≤
s
2
X
j:T[j]̸=T ′[j]
|αij0|2 + |αij1|2
(25)
where δi is defined in Equation (16).
We then let
mj :=
d
X
i=1
|αij0|2 + |αij1|2
(26)
We know that PN
j=0 mj = d. Thus, for any ℓ,
there exist a set J of ℓindices such that
X
j∈J
mj ≤ℓd
N .
(27)
If we set T and T ′ to differ only on J , we see
that Pd
i=1 δ2
i ≤2 P
j∈J mj ≤2ℓd
N , from which we
see that
d
X
i=1
δi ≤d
s
2ℓ
N .
(28)
We now argue by saying that since so little of
the input state is concentrated on certain indices,
we can replace any table T with a different table
that differs on those indices, and this will be in-
distinguishable to the QRACM distillation-and-
teleportation process. Since the process needs to
handle all logical inputs, it must fail on that in-
dex.
Theorem C.2. Suppose there is a QRACM
state distillation-and-teleportation process, ac-
cessing tables of size N = 2n and making at most
d calls to the physical QRACM. Then the mini-
mal fidelity for this process is at most
3
4 + d
r 2
N .
(29)
Proof. Our distillation process is defined by some
initial state ρ1, and d channels Φi, where we in-
terleave access to the QRAM device with these
channels.
Then for each table T, we can then
define states ρi(T) such that
ρi+1(T) = Φi+1 ◦(I ⊗Q(T))ρi(T)
(30)
(using Q(T) as a more compact notation for
UQRACM(T), the unitary channel which performs
the QRACM access), with ρ1(T) defined to be ρ1
for all tables T.
Let T be any table.
Let J be the set of ℓ
indices implied by Theorem C.1 for these states,
and let T ′ be a table that differs from T in those
ℓindices. We will show by induction that
∥ρi(T ′) −ρi(T)∥1 ≤
i
X
j=1
δj
(31)
with δi as in Theorem C.1. This holds for i = 1
since all tables use the same starting state.
For induction, recall from the definition of the
distillation process that
ρi+1(T) = Φi+1 ◦(I ⊗Q(T))ρi(T)
(32)
(similarly for T ′) where Q(T) = UQRACM(T) (a
more compact notation), and Φi is the channel
of any other computations performed during dis-
tillation between subsequent QRACM accesses.
Since the channel Φi+1 can only reduce the trace
distance between then by the data processing in-
equality, we obtain:
∥ρi+1(T ′) −ρi+1(T)∥1
(33)
≤∥(I ⊗Q(T ′))ρi(T ′) −(I ⊗Q)(T)ρi(T)∥1
(34)
≤∥((I ⊗Q(T) −(I ⊗Q(T ′))ρi(T)∥1
(35)
+ ∥(I ⊗Q(T ′))(ρi(T ′) −ρi(T))∥1
(36)
≤δi+1 +
i
X
j=1
δj
(37)
using Theorem C.1.
We finally note that ρd(T) = ρdistill(T), the
state input into the final teleportation process.
This means the distance between ρdistill(T) and
ρdistill(T ′) is at most d
q
2ℓ
N by Theorem C.1.
Again by the data processing inequality, the fi-
nal teleportation process cannot increase the dis-
tance. Denoting the full process as ˜UQRACM(T),
we see that for any logical input ρL, we obtain
∥( ˜UQRACM(T) −˜UQRACM(T ′))ρL∥1 ≤d
s
2ℓ
N
(38)
However, let ρL = |j⟩⟨j | ⊗|0⟩⟨0| for some j
with T[j] ̸= T ′[j]. Then we have for the ideal
QRACM access,
∥(UQRACM(T) −UQRACM(T ′))(ρL)∥1 = 1 (39)
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
50

--- PAGE 51 ---
But by the triangle inequality,
1 =∥(UQRACM(T) −UQRACM(T ′))(ρL)∥1
(40)
≤∥(UQRACM(T) −˜UQRACM(T))ρL∥1
(41)
+ ∥(UQRACM(T ′) −˜UQRACM(T ′))ρL∥1
+ ∥( ˜UQRACM(T) −˜UQRACM(T ′))ρL∥1
1 −d
s
2ℓ
N ≤∥(UQRACM(T) −˜UQRACM(T))ρL∥1
(42)
+ ∥(UQRACM(T ′) −˜UQRACM(T ′))ρL∥1
meaning (WLOG) that the distance between the
realized QRACM channel and the ideal QRACM
channel, for state ρL on access to table T or T ′,
is at least
1
2 −d
q
ℓ
2N .
Using known relations
between trace distance and fidelity and setting
ℓ= 1 gives the result.
Accepted in Quantum 2025-10-16, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
51
